Whan ended was the lyf of Seinte Cecile,
When the life of Saint Cecile was ended,
Er we hadde riden fully fyve mile,
Before we had ridden a good five miles,
At Boghtoun under Blee us gan atake
At Boghtoun under Blee overtook us
A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
A man who was clothed in black clothes,
And undernethe he hadde a whyt surplys.
And underneath that he had a white surplice.
His hakeney, that was al pomely grys,
His riding horse, that was all dapple gray,
So swatte that it wonder was to see;
So sweated that it was a wonder to see;
It semed as he had priked miles three.
It seemed as if he had spurred hard for three miles.
The hors eek that his yeman rood upon
The horse also that his yeoman rode upon
So swatte that unnethe myghte it gon.
So sweated that it could hardly move.
Aboute the peytrel stood the foom ful hye;
About the collar stood the foam very high;
He was of foom al flekked as a pye.
He was by foam all flecked like a magpie.
A male tweyfoold on his croper lay;
A double bag on his crupper lay;
It semed that he caried lite array.
It seemed that he carried little gear.
Al light for somer rood this worthy man,
All lightly clad for summer rode this worthy man,
And in myn herte wondren I bigan
And in my heart I began to wonder
What that he was til that I understood
What he was until I understood
How that his cloke was sowed to his hood,
How his cloak was sewn to his hood,
For which, whan I hadde longe avysed me,
For which, when I had long thought about it,
I demed hym som chanoun for to be.
I judged him to be some sort of canon.
His hat heeng at his bak doun by a laas,
His hat hung at his back down by a strap,
For he hadde riden moore than trot or paas;
For he had ridden at more than a trot or a walk;
He hadde ay priked lik as he were wood.
He had always spurred as if he were crazy.
A clote-leef he hadde under his hood
A burdock-leaf he had under his hood
For swoot and for to keep his heed from heete.
For sweat and to keep his head from heat.
But it was joye for to seen hym swete!
But what a joy it was to see him sweat!
His forheed dropped as a stillatorie
His forehead dripped like a still
Were ful of plantayne and of paritorie.
Full of the herbs plantain and pellitory.
And whan that he was come, he gan to crye,
And when he was come to us, he began to cry out,
"God save," quod he, "this joly compaignye!
"God save," said he, "this jolly company!
Faste have I priked," quod he, "for youre sake,
Fast have I spurred," said he, "for your sake,
By cause that I wolde yow atake,
Because I wanted to overtake you,
To riden in this myrie compaignye."
To ride in this merry company."
His yeman eek was ful of curteisye,
His yeoman also was full of courtesy,
And seyde, "Sires, now in the morwe-tyde
And said, "Sirs, just now in the morning time
I saugh yow ryde out of youre hostelrie,
I saw you ride out of your hostelry,
And warned heer my lord and my soverayn,
And told my lord here and my sovereign,
Which that to ryden with yow is ful fayn
Who is very eager to ride with you
For his desport; he loveth daliaunce."
For his pleasure; he loves sociability."
"Freend, for thy warnyng God yeve thee good chaunce,"
"Friend, for thy telling him God give thee good luck,"
Thanne seyde oure Hoost, "for certein it wolde seme
Then said our Host, "for certainly it would seem
Thy lord were wys, and so I may wel deme.
Thy lord is wise, and as I can well judge.
He is ful jocunde also, dar I leye!
He is very cheerful also, I dare wager!
Can he oght telle a myrie tale or tweye,
Can he in any way tell a merry tale or two,
With which he glade may this compaignye?"
With which he may gladden this company?"
"Who, sire? My lord? Ye, ye, withouten lye,
"Who, sir? My lord? Yes, yes, without lie,
He kan of murthe and eek of jolitee
He knows about mirth and also about jollity
Nat but ynough; also, sire, trusteth me,
More than enough; also, sir, trust me,
And ye hym knewe as wel as do I,
If you knew him as well as do I,
Ye wolde wondre how wel and craftily
You would wonder how well and craftily
He koude werke, and that in sondry wise.
He knows how to work, and that in a variety of ways.
He hath take on hym many a greet emprise,
He has taken on him many a great enterprise,
Which were ful hard for any that is heere
Which would be very hard for any one who is here
To brynge aboute, but they of hym it leere.
To bring about, unless they learn it from him.
As hoomly as he rit amonges yow,
Despite how modestly he rides amongst you,
If ye hym knewe, it wolde be for youre prow.
If you knew him, it would be to your advantage.
Ye wolde nat forgoon his aqueyntaunce
You would not forgo his acquaintance
For muchel good, I dar leye in balaunce
For great riches, I dare wager on that
Al that I have in my possessioun.
All that I have in my possession.
He is a man of heigh discrecioun;
He is a man of great discretion;
I warne yow wel, he is a passyng man."
I tell you indeed, he is a remarkable man."
"Wel," quod oure Hoost, "I pray thee, tel me than,
"Well," said our Host, "I pray thee, tell me then,
Is he a clerk, or noon? Telle what he is."
Is he a clerk, or not? Tell what he is."
"Nay, he is gretter than a clerk, ywis,"
"Nay, he is greater than a clerk, indeed,"
Seyde this Yeman, "and in wordes fewe,
Said this Yeoman, "and in few words,
Hoost, of his craft somwhat I wol yow shewe.
Host, I will show you something of his craft.
"I seye, my lord kan swich subtilitee --
"I say, my lord knows such esoteric science --
But al his craft ye may nat wite at me,
But all his craft you can not know from me,
And somwhat helpe I yet to his wirkyng --
And yet somewhat I help in his work --
That al this ground on which we been ridyng,
That all this ground on which we are riding,
Til that we come to Caunterbury toun,
Until we come to Canterbury town,
He koude al clene turnen up-so-doun,
He could turn all completely upside down,
And pave it al of silver and of gold."
And pave it all with silver and with gold."
And whan this Yeman hadde this tale ytold
And when this Yeoman had this tale told
Unto oure Hoost, he seyde, "Benedicitee!
Unto our Host, he said, "Bless you!
This thyng is wonder merveillous to me,
This thing is wonderfully marvelous to me,
Syn that thy lord is of so heigh prudence,
Since thy lord is of such great prudence,
By cause of which men sholde hym reverence,
Because of which men should reverence him,
That of his worshipe rekketh he so lite.
That he cares so little for his own self-respect.
His overslope nys nat worth a myte,
His outer garment is not worth a fraction of a penny,
As in effect, to hym, so moot I go,
Because in fact, to him, as I may go (I swear),
It is al baudy and totore also.
It is all dirty and tattered also.
Why is thy lord so sluttissh, I the preye,
Why is thy lord so slovenly, I pray thee,
And is of power bettre clooth to beye,
And has the power to buy better cloth,
If that his dede accorde with thy speche?
If his deeds accord with thy speech?
Telle me that, and that I thee biseche."
Tell me that, and of that I beseech thee."
"Why?" quod this Yeman, "wherto axe ye me?
"Why?" said this Yeoman, "why do you ask me?
God help me so, for he shal nevere thee!
So help me God, for he shall never prosper!
(But I wol nat avowe that I seye,
(But I will not publicly acknowledge what I say,
And therfore keepe it secree, I yow preye.)
And therefore keep it secret, I pray you.)
He is to wys, in feith, as I bileeve.
He is too wise, in faith, as I believe.
That that is overdoon, it wol nat preeve
That which is done too much, it will not turn out
Aright, as clerkes seyn; it is a vice.
Right, as clerks say; it is a vice.
Wherfore in that I holde hym lewed and nyce.
Therefore in that I hold him ignorant and foolish.
For whan a man hath over-greet a wit,
For when a man has too great a wit,
Ful oft hym happeth to mysusen it.
Very often he happens to misuse it.
So dooth my lord, and that me greveth soore;
So does my lord, and that sorely grieves me;
God it amende! I kan sey yow namoore."
God amend it! I can tell you no more."
"Ther-of no fors, good Yeman," quod oure Hoost;
"That does not matter, good Yeoman," said our Host;
"Syn of the konnyng of thy lord thow woost,
"Since thou knowest of the cunning of thy lord,
Telle how he dooth, I pray thee hertely,
Tell how he does, I pray thee heartily,
Syn that he is so crafty and so sly.
Since he is so crafty and so sly.
Where dwelle ye, if it to telle be?"
Where do you dwell, if it can be told?"
"In the suburbes of a toun," quod he,
"In the outskirts of a town," said he,
"Lurkynge in hernes and in lanes blynde,
"Lurking in hiding places and in dead-end alleys,
Whereas thise robbours and thise theves by kynde
Where these robbers and these thieves by nature
Holden hir pryvee fereful residence,
Hold their private fearful residence,
As they that dar nat shewen hir presence;
Like those who dare not show their presence;
So faren we, if I shal seye the sothe."
So fare we, if I shall say the truth."
"Now," quod oure Hoost, "yit lat me talke to the.
"Now," said our Host, "yet let me talk to thee.
Why artow so discoloured of thy face?"
Why art thou so discolored in thy face?"
"Peter!" quod he, "God yeve it harde grace,
"Peter!" said he, "God give it bad luck,
I am so used in the fyr to blowe
I am so used to blow in the fire
That it hath chaunged my colour, I trowe.
That it has changed my color, I believe.
I am nat wont in no mirour to prie,
I am not accustomed to peer in any mirror,
But swynke soore and lerne multiplie.
But to work hard and to learn to transmute metals.
We blondren evere and pouren in the fir,
We blunder ever and stare in the fire,
And for al that we faille of oure desir,
And despite all that, we fail to achieve our desire,
For evere we lakken oure conclusioun.
For ever we lack our desired conclusion.
To muchel folk we doon illusioun,
To many folk we do delusion,
And borwe gold, be it a pound or two,
And borrow gold, be it a pound or two,
Or ten, or twelve, or manye sommes mo,
Or ten, or twelve, or many greater sums,
And make hem wenen, at the leeste weye,
And make them believe, at the very least,
That of a pound we koude make tweye.
That of one pound we could make two.
Yet is it fals, but ay we han good hope
Yet is it false, but always we have good hope
It for to doon, and after it we grope.
To do it, and after it we grope.
But that science is so fer us biforn,
But that knowledge is so far ahead of us,
We mowen nat, although we hadden it sworn,
We can not, although we had sworn it,
It overtake, it slit awey so faste.
Overtake it, it slides away so fast.
It wole us maken beggers atte laste."
It will make us beggars at the last."
Whil this Yeman was thus in his talkyng,
While this Yeoman was thus in his talking,
This Chanoun drough hym neer and herde al thyng
This Canon drew himself nearer and heard every thing
Which this Yeman spak, for suspecioun
Which this Yeoman spoke, for suspicion
Of mennes speche evere hadde this Chanoun.
Of men's speech ever had this Canon.
For Catoun seith that he that gilty is
For Cato says that he who is guilty
Demeth alle thyng be spoke of hym, ywis.
Believes every thing is spoken about him, indeed.
That was the cause he gan so ny hym drawe
That was the cause he did draw himself so near
To his Yeman, to herknen al his sawe.
To his Yeoman, to hear all his speech.
And thus he seyde unto his Yeman tho:
And thus he said unto his Yeoman then:
"Hoold thou thy pees and spek no wordes mo,
"Hold thou thy peace and speak no more words,
For if thou do, thou shalt it deere abye.
For if thou do, thou shalt dearly pay for it.
Thou sclaundrest me heere in this compaignye,
Thou slanderest me here in this company,
And eek discoverest that thou sholdest hyde."
And also revealest what thou shouldest hide."
"Ye," quod oure Hoost, "telle on, what so bityde.
"Yes," said our Host, "tell on, whataever may happen.
Of al his thretyng rekke nat a myte!"
Reckon all his threatening not worth a fraction of a penny!"
"In feith," quod he, "namoore I do but lyte."
"In faith," said he, "I do (reckon him) but little any more."
And whan this Chanon saugh it wolde nat bee,
And when this Canon saw it would not be,
But his Yeman wolde telle his pryvetee,
But that his Yeoman would tell his secrets,
He fledde awey for verray sorwe and shame.
He fled away for true sorrow and shame.
"A!" quod the Yeman, "heere shal arise game;
"Ah!" said the Yeoman, "here shall arise some amusement;
Al that I kan anon now wol I telle.
Right now I will tell all that I know.
Syn he is goon, the foule feend hym quelle!
Since he is gone, may the foul fiend kill him!
For nevere heerafter wol I with hym meete
For never hereafter will I meet with him
For peny ne for pound, I yow biheete.
For penny nor for pound, I promise you.
He that me broghte first unto that game,
He who brought me first unto that game,
Er that he dye, sorwe have he and shame!
Before he dies, may he have sorrow and shame!
For it is ernest to me, by my feith;
For it is serious (not game) to me, by my faith;
That feele I wel, what so any man seith.
That feel I well, whatever any man says.
And yet, for al my smert and al my grief,
And yet, for all my pain and all my grief,
For al my sorwe, labour, and meschief,
For all my sorrow, labor, and mischief,
I koude nevere leve it in no wise.
I could never leave it in any way.
Now wolde God my wit myghte suffise
Now I wish to God my wit might suffice
To tellen al that longeth to that art!
To tell all that belongs to that art!
But nathelees yow wol I tellen part.
But nonetheless you desire that I tell part.
Syn that my lord is goon, I wol nat spare;
Since my lord is gone, I will not spare;
Swich thyng as that I knowe, I wol declare.
Such things as what I know, I will declare.
Heere endeth the Prologe of the Chanouns Yemannes Tale .
Here ends the Prologue of the Canon's Yeoman's Tale.
Heere bigynneth the Chanouns Yeman his Tale.
Here begins the Canon's Yeoman's Tale.
Prima Pars
Prima Pars
With this Chanoun I dwelt have seven yeer,
With this Canon I have dwelt seven years,
And of his science am I never the neer.
And as to his science I am never the nearer (to success).
Al that I hadde I have lost therby,
All that I had I have lost thereby,
And, God woot, so hath many mo than I.
And, God knows, so have many more than I.
Ther I was wont to be right fressh and gay
Where I was accustomed to be right fresh and gay
Of clothyng and of oother good array,
Of clothing and of other splendid furnishings,
Now may I were an hose upon myn heed;
Now may I wear a hose upon my head;
And wher my colour was bothe fressh and reed,
And whereas my color was both fresh and red,
Now is it wan and of a leden hewe --
Now is it pale and of a leaden hue --
Whoso it useth, soore shal he rewe! --
Whoever uses it (that art), sorely shall he rue! --
And of my swynk yet blered is myn ye.
And by my work yet my eye is bleared.
Lo, which avantage is to multiplie!
Lo, how profitable it is to transute metals!
That slidynge science hath me maad so bare
That slippery science has made me so bare
That I have no good, wher that evere I fare;
That I have no possessions, wherever I fare;
And yet I am endetted so therby
And yet by this I am so indebted
Of gold that I have borwed, trewely,
For gold that I have borrowed, truly,
That whil I lyve I shal it quite nevere.
That while I live I shall never repay it.
Lat every man be war by me for evere!
Let every man be warned by me forever!
What maner man that casteth hym therto,
Whatever sort of man that applies himself to that,
If he continue, I holde his thrift ydo.
If he continue, I consider his prosperity done for.
For so helpe me God, therby shal he nat wynne,
For so help me God, he shall not profit thereby,
But empte his purs and make his wittes thynne.
But empty his purse and make his wits thin.
And whan he thurgh his madnesse and folye
And when he through his madness and folly
Hath lost his owene good thurgh jupartye,
Has lost his own possessions in this dangerous business,
Thanne he exciteth oother folk therto,
Then he incites other folk to that,
To lesen hir good as he hymself hath do.
To lose their possessions as he himself has done.
For unto shrewes joye it is and ese
For unto scoundrels it is joy and ease
To have hir felawes in peyne and disese.
To have their fellows in pain and hardship.
Thus was I ones lerned of a clerk.
Thus was I once taught by a clerk.
Of that no charge; I wol speke of oure werk.
No matter about that; I will speak of our work.
Whan we been there as we shul exercise
When we are where we shall exercise
Oure elvysshe craft, we semen wonder wise,
Our mysterious craft, we seem wonderfully wise,
Oure termes been so clergial and so queynte.
Our terms are so scholarly and so strange.
I blowe the fir til that myn herte feynte.
I blow the fire until my heart faints.
What sholde I tellen ech proporcion
Why should I tell each proportion
Of thynges whiche that we werche upon --
Of the things that we work upon --
As on fyve or sixe ounces, may wel be,
As on five or six ounces, it may well be,
Of silver, or som oother quantitee --
Of silver, or some other quantity --
And bisye me to telle yow the names
And busy myself to tell you the names
Of orpyment, brent bones, iren squames,
Of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), burned bones, iron flakes,
That into poudre grounden been ful smal;
That are ground into very fine powder;
And in an erthen pot how put is al,
And how all is put in an earthen pot,
And salt yput in, and also papeer,
And salt put in, and also pepper,
Biforn thise poudres that I speke of heer;
Before these powders that I speak of here;
And wel ycovered with a lampe of glas;
And well covered with a lamp-shaped vessel of glass;
And of muche oother thyng which that ther was;
And of many other things which were there;
And of the pot and glasses enlutyng
And sealing of the pot and glasses
That of the eyr myghte passe out nothyng;
So that not a bit of the air could pass out;
And of the esy fir, and smart also,
And of the slow fir, and fast also,
Which that was maad, and of the care and wo
Which was made, and of the care and woe
That we hadde in oure matires sublymyng,
That we had in purifying our materials,
And in amalgamyng and calcenyng
And in blending and reducing to powder
Of quyksilver, yclept mercurie crude?
Of quicksilver, called raw mercury?
For alle oure sleightes we kan nat conclude.
Despite all our tricks we can not succeed.
Oure orpyment and sublymed mercurie,
Our orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), and purified mercury,
Oure grounden litarge eek on the porfurie,
Our litharge (lead monoxide) ground also on the porphyry mortar,
Of ech of thise of ounces a certeyn --
A certain number of ounces of each of these --
Noght helpeth us; oure labour is in veyn.
Nothing helps us; our labor is in vain.
Ne eek oure spirites ascencioun,
Also neither our spirit's vaporization,
Ne oure materes that lyen al fix adoun,
Nor our materials that remain fixed in the pot,
Mowe in oure werkyng no thyng us availle,
Can in any way help us in our working,
For lost is al oure labour and travaille;
For all our labor and travail is lost;
And al the cost, a twenty devel waye,
And all the expenditure, in the name of twenty devils,
Is lost also, which we upon it laye.
Which we spent upon it, is lost also.
Ther is also ful many another thyng
There is also very many another thing
That is unto oure craft apertenyng.
That pertains unto our craft.
Though I by ordre hem nat reherce kan,
Though I can not list them in their proper order,
By cause that I am a lewed man,
Because I am an unlearned man,
Yet wol I telle hem as they come to mynde,
Yet will I tell them as they come to mind,
Thogh I ne kan nat sette hem in hir kynde:
Though I can not set them in their proper categories:
As boole armonyak, verdegrees, boras,
Such as armenian bol (red clay), verdigris (copper acetate), borax,
And sondry vessels maad of erthe and glas,
And various vessels made of clay and glass,
Oure urynales and oure descensories,
Our urinals and our retorts,
Violes, crosletz, and sublymatories,
Vials, crucibles, and sublimation vessels,
Cucurbites and alambikes eek,
Vessels for distilling and alembics also,
And othere swiche, deere ynough a leek --
And other such things, very expensive at the price of a leek --
Nat nedeth it for to reherce hem alle --
There ia no need to list them all --
Watres rubifiyng, and boles galle,
Liquids that cause reddening, and bull's gall,
Arsenyk, sal armonyak, and brymstoon;
Arsenic, sal ammoniac, and brimstone;
And herbes koude I telle eek many oon,
And herbs could I tell also many a one,
As egremoyne, valerian, and lunarie,
Such as agrimony, valerian, and moonwort,
And othere swiche, if that me liste tarie;
And other such things, if I wanted to tarry;
Oure lampes brennyng bothe nyght and day,
Our lamps burning both night and day,
To brynge aboute oure purpos, if we may;
To bring about our purpose, if we can;
Oure fourneys eek of calcinacioun,
Also our furnace for reducing substances to powder,
And of watres albificacioun;
And of whitening by liquids;
Unslekked lym, chalk, and gleyre of an ey,
Unslaked lime, chalk, and white of an egg,
Poudres diverse, asshes, donge, pisse, and cley,
Various powders, ashes, dung, piss, and clay,
Cered pokkets, sal peter, vitriole,
Waxed (waterproofed) packets, saltpeter, sulphuric acid,
And diverse fires maad of wode and cole;
And various sorts of fires made of wood and coal;
Sal tartre, alkaly, and sal preparat,
Potassium nitrate, alkali, and purified salt,
And combust materes and coagulat;
And burned materials and solidified;
Cley maad with hors or mannes heer, and oille
Clay made with horse or man's hair, and oil
Of tartre, alum glas, berme, wort, and argoille,
Of tartar, crystallized alum, yeast, unfermented malt, and argol,
Resalgar, and oure materes enbibyng,
Arsenic, and soaking our materials,
And eek of oure materes encorporyng,
And also of forming a compound of our materials,
And of oure silver citrinacioun,
And of turning our silver to a yellow color,
Oure cementyng and fermentacioun,
Our fusion by heat and fermentation,
Oure yngottes, testes, and many mo.
Our casting molds, crucibles for testing, and many more.
I wol yow telle, as was me taught also,
I will tell you, as it was taught also to me,
The foure spirites and the bodies sevene,
The four spirits and the seven metals
By ordre, as ofte I herde my lord hem nevene.
By order, as often I heard my lord name them.
The firste spirit quyksilver called is,
The first spirit is called quicksilver,
The seconde orpyment, the thridde, ywis,
The second orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), the third, indeed,
Sal armonyak, and the ferthe brymstoon.
Sal ammoniac, and the fourth brimstone.
The bodyes sevene eek, lo, hem heere anoon:
The seven metals also, lo, hear them now:
Sol gold is, and Luna silver we insist,
Sun is gold, and Moon silver we say,
Mars iren, Mercurie quyksilver we clepe,
Mars iron, Mercury we call quicksilver,
Saturnus leed, and Juppiter is tyn,
Saturn lead, and Jupiter is tin,
And Venus coper, by my fader kyn!
And Venus copper, by my father's kin!
This cursed craft whoso wole excercise,
Whoever will exercise this cursed craft,
He shal no good han that hym may suffise,
He shall have no wealth that can be enough for him,
For al the good he spendeth theraboute
For all the wealth he spends on this
He lese shal; therof have I no doute.
He shall lose; of that have I no doubt.
Whoso that listeth outen his folie,
Whoever desires to make public his folly,
Lat hym come forth and lerne multiplie;
Let him come forth and learn to transmute base metals;
And every man that oght hath in his cofre,
And every man that has anything in his strong-box,
Lat hym appiere and wexe a philosophre.
Let him appear and become an alchemist.
Ascaunce that craft is so light to leere?
Is that craft were so easy to learn?
Nay, nay, God woot, al be he monk or frere,
Nay, nay, God knows, be he monk or friar,
Preest or chanoun, or any oother wyght,
Priest or canon, or any other creature,
Though he sitte at his book bothe day and nyght
Though he sit at his book both day and night
In lernyng of this elvysshe nyce loore,
In learning of this mysterious foolish lore,
Al is in veyn, and parde, muchel moore.
All is in vain, and by God, much more.
To lerne a lewed man this subtiltee --
To teach an ignorant man this ingenious skill --
Fy! Spek nat therof, for it wol nat bee.
Fie! Speak not about that, for it will not be.
And konne he letterure or konne he noon,
And know he book learning or know he none,
As in effect, he shal fynde it al oon.
In fact, he shall find it all the same.
For bothe two, by my savacioun,
For both of the two, by my salvation,
Concluden in multiplicacioun
Conclude in transmutation
Ylike wel, whan they han al ydo;
Equally well, when they are all done;
This is to seyn, they faillen bothe two.
This is to say, they fail, both of the two.
Yet forgat I to maken rehersaille
Yet I forgot to make enumeration
Of watres corosif, and of lymaille,
Of acidic waters, and of metal filings,
And of bodies mollificacioun,
And of the softening of materials,
And also of hire induracioun;
And also of their hardening;
Oilles, ablucions, and metal fusible --
Oils, cleansings, and fusible metal --
To tellen al wolde passen any bible
To tell all would be longer than any large book
That owher is; wherfore, as for the beste,
That is anywhere; therefore, as for the best,
Of alle thise names now wol I me reste,
Of all these names now I will rest myself,
For, as I trowe, I have yow toold ynowe
For, as I believe, I have told you enough
To reyse a feend, al looke he never so rowe.
To raise a fiend, though he look never so rough.
A! Nay! Lat be; the philosophres stoon,
Ah! Nay! Let be; the philosophers' stone,
Elixer clept, we sechen faste echoon;
Called Elixir, we seek earnestly each one of us;
For hadde we hym, thanne were we siker ynow.
For if we had it, then we would be very well off.
But unto God of hevene I make avow,
But unto God of heaven I make avow,
For al oure craft, whan we han al ydo,
Despite all our craft, when we have all done,
And al oure sleighte, he wol nat come us to.
And all our skill, he will not come us to.
He hath ymaad us spenden muchel good,
He has made us spend much money,
For sorwe of which almoost we wexen wood,
For sorrow of which we almost go mad,
But that good hope crepeth in oure herte,
Except that good hope creeps into our heart,
Supposynge evere, though we sore smerte,
Supposing ever, though we sorely suffer,
To be releeved by hym afterward.
To be relieved by him afterward.
Swich supposyng and hope is sharp and hard;
Such supposing and hope is sharp and hard;
I warne yow wel, it is to seken evere.
I warn you well, it is to keep seeking forever.
That futur temps hath maad men to dissevere,
That future tense has made men to be separated,
In trust therof, from al that evere they hadde.
In trust on that, from all that ever they had.
Yet of that art they kan nat wexen sadde,
Yet of that art they can not be satisfied,
For unto hem it is a bitter sweete --
For unto them it is a bitter sweet --
So semeth it -- for nadde they but a sheete
So it seems -- for had they nothing but a sheet
Which that they myghte wrappe hem inne a-nyght,
Which they might wrap themselves in at night,
And a brat to walken inne by daylyght,
And a rough cloak to walk in by daylight,
They wolde hem selle and spenden on this craft.
They would sell them and spend it on this craft.
They kan nat stynte til no thyng be laft.
They can not stop until nothing is left.
And everemoore, where that evere they goon,
And evermore, wherever they go,
Men may hem knowe by smel of brymstoon.
Men can know them by the smell of brimstone.
For al the world they stynken as a goot;
For all the world they stink like a goat;
Hir savour is so rammyssh and so hoot
Their odor is so like a goat and so intense
That though a man from hem a mile be,
That though a man be a mile from them,
The savour wole infecte hym, trusteth me.
The odor will infect him, trust me.
Lo, thus by smellyng and threedbare array,
Lo, thus by smelling and threadbare array,
If that men liste, this folk they knowe may.
If men so desire, this folk they can know.
And if a man wole aske hem pryvely
And if a man will ask them privily
Why they been clothed so unthriftily,
Why they are clothed so poorly,
They right anon wol rownen in his ere,
They right away will whisper in his ear,
And seyn that if that they espied were,
And say that if they were recognized,
Men wolde hem slee by cause of hir science.
Men would slay them because of their knowledge.
Lo, thus this folk bitrayen innocence!
Lo, thus these folk betray innocence!
Passe over this; I go my tale unto.
Pass over this; I go unto my tale.
Er that the pot be on the fir ydo,
Before the pot on the fire is done,
Of metals with a certeyn quantitee,
With a specific quantity of metals,
My lord hem tempreth, and no man but he --
My lord tempers them, and no man but he --
Now he is goon, I dar seyn boldely --
Now he is gone, I dare say boldly --
For, as men seyn, he kan doon craftily.
For, as men say, he can work craftily.
Algate I woot wel he hath swich a name;
Although I know well he has such a reputation;
And yet ful ofte he renneth in a blame.
And yet very often he gets in trouble.
And wite ye how? Ful ofte it happeth so
And do you know how? Full often it so happens
The pot tobreketh, and farewel, al is go!
The pot shatters, and farewell, all is gone!
Thise metals been of so greet violence
These metals are of such great violence
Oure walles mowe nat make hem resistence,
The sides of our vessels can not make resistance to them,
But if they weren wroght of lym and stoon;
Unless they were made of lime and stone;
They percen so, and thurgh the wal they goon.
They pierce so, and through the wall they go.
And somme of hem synken into the ground --
And some of them sink into the ground --
Thus han we lost by tymes many a pound --
Thus have we quickly lost many a pound --
And somme are scatered al the floor aboute;
And some are scattered all over the floor;
Somme lepe into the roof. Withouten doute,
Some leap into the roof. Without doubt,
Though that the feend noght in oure sighte hym shewe,
Though the fiend does not show himself to our sight,
I trowe he with us be, that ilke shrewe!
I believe he is with us, that same scoundrel!
In helle, where that he is lord and sire,
In hell, where he is lord and sire,
Nis ther moore wo, ne moore rancour ne ire.
There is no greater woe, nor greater rancor nor ire.
Whan that oure pot is broke, as I have sayd,
When our pot is broken, as I have said,
Every man chit and halt hym yvele apayd.
Every man chides and considers himsef ill used.
Somme seyde it was long on the fir makyng;
Some said it was due to the making of the fire;
Somme seyde nay, it was on the blowyng --
Some said nay, it was due to the blowing --
Thanne was I fered, for that was myn office.
Then was I afraid, for that was my job.
"Straw!" quod the thridde, "ye been lewed and nyce.
"Rubbish!" said the third, "you are ignorant and foolish.
It was nat tempred as it oghte be."
It was not tempered as it ought to be."
"Nay," quod the fourthe, "stynt and herkne me.
"Nay," said the fourth, "be quiet and listen to me.
By cause oure fir ne was nat maad of beech,
Because our fire was not made of beech,
That is the cause and oother noon, so thee'ch!"
That is the cause and none other, as I may prosper!"
I kan nat telle wheron it was long,
I can not tell what it was due to,
But wel I woot greet strif is us among.
But well I know great strife is among us.
"What," quod my lord, "ther is namoore to doone;
"Well," said my lord, "there is no more to do;
Of thise perils I wol be war eftsoone.
Of these perils I will be wary next time.
I am right siker that the pot was crased.
I am very sure that the pot was cracked.
Be as be may, be ye no thyng amased;
Be as be may, be you in no way amazed;
As usage is, lat swepe the floor as swithe,
As our practice is, have the floor quickly swept,
Plukke up youre hertes and beeth glad and blithe."
Pluck up your hearts and be glad and blithe."
The mullok on an heep ysweped was,
The rubbish was swept in a heap,
And on the floor ycast a canevas,
And on the floor was cast a canvas,
And al this mullok in a syve ythrowe,
And all this rubbish thrown in a sieve
And sifted, and ypiked many a throwe.
And sifted, and picked over many a time.
"Pardee," quod oon, "somwhat of oure metal
"By God," said one, "something of our metal
Yet is ther heere, though that we han nat al.
Yet is there here, though we have not all.
And though this thyng myshapped have as now,
And though this thing may have turned out badly this time,
Another tyme it may be well ynow.
Another time it may go well indeed.
Us moste putte oure good in aventure.
We must put our possessions at risk.
A marchant, pardee, may nat ay endure,
A merchant, by God, may not endure forever,
Trusteth me wel, in his prosperitee.
Trust me well, in his prosperity.
Somtyme his good is drowned in the see,
Sometimes his goods are drowned in the sea,
And somtyme comth it sauf unto the londe."
And sometime they come safely unto the land."
"Pees!" quod my lord, "the nexte tyme I wol fonde
"Quiet!" said my lord, "the next time I will endeavor
To bryngen oure craft al in another plite,
To bring our experiment to an entirely different state,
And but I do, sires, lat me han the wite.
And unless I do, sirs, let me have the blame.
Ther was defaute in somwhat, wel I woot."
There was something wrong, I well know."
Another seyde the fir was over-hoot --
Another said the fire was too hot --
But, be it hoot or coold, I dar seye this,
But, be it hot or cold, I dare say this,
That we concluden everemoore amys.
That we conclude always with something gone wrong.
We faille of that which that we wolden have,
We fail to get that which we want to have,
And in oure madnesse everemoore we rave.
And in our madness always we rave.
And whan we been togidres everichoon,
And when we are all together every one,
Every man semeth a Salomon.
Every man seems a Solomon.
But al thyng which that shineth as the gold
But every thing thah shines like gold
Nis nat gold, as that I have herd told;
Is not gold, as I have heard said;
Ne every appul that is fair at eye
Nor every apple that is fair to the eye
Ne is nat good, what so men clappe or crye.
Is not good, whatever men may chatter or cry.
Right so, lo, fareth it amonges us:
Right so, lo, it fares among us:
He that semeth the wiseste, by Jhesus,
He who seems the wisest, by Jesus,
Is moost fool, whan it cometh to the preef;
Is the greatest fool, when it comes to the proof;
And he that semeth trewest is a theef.
And he that seems truest is a thief.
That shul ye knowe, er that I fro yow wende,
That shall you know, before I from you wend,
By that I of my tale have maad an ende.
By the time that I have made an end of my tale.
Explicit prima pars
Ther is a chanoun of religioun
There is a canon regular
Amonges us, wolde infecte al a toun,
Amongst us, who would infect a whole town,
Thogh it as greet were as was Nynyvee,
Though it were as big as was Nineveh,
Rome, Alisaundre, Troye, and othere three.
Rome, Alexandria, Troy, and any three others.
His sleightes and his infinite falsnesse
His tricks and his infinite falseness
Ther koude no man writen, as I gesse,
No man could write, as I guess,
Though that he myghte lyve a thousand yeer.
Though he might live a thousand years.
In al this world of falshede nis his peer,
In all this world is not his equal in falsehood,
For in his termes he wol hym so wynde,
For in his technical terms he will so wrap himself,
And speke his wordes in so sly a kynde,
And speak his words in so deceitful a manner,
Whanne he commune shal with any wight,
When he shall converse with any person,
That he wol make hym doten anonright,
That he will make a fool of him right away,
But it a feend be, as hymselven is.
Unless it be a fiend, as he himself is.
Ful many a man hath he bigiled er this,
Very many a man has he beguiled before this,
And wole, if that he lyve may a while;
And will, if he may live a while longer;
And yet men ride and goon ful many a mile
And yet men ride and walk very many a mile
Hym for to seke and have his aqueyntaunce,
To seek him and have his acquaintance,
Noght knowynge of his false governaunce.
Not knowing of his false way of life.
And if yow list to yeve me audience,
And if you want to listen to me,
I wol it tellen heere in youre presence.
I will tell it here in your presence.
But worshipful chanons religious,
But worshipful religious canons,
Ne demeth nat that I sclaundre youre hous,
Do not think that I slander your house,
Although that my tale of a chanoun bee.
Although my tale be about a canon.
Of every ordre som shrewe is, pardee,
There is some scoundrel in every order, by God,
And God forbede that al a compaignye
And God forbid that a whole company
Sholde rewe o singuleer mannes folye.
Should suffer for one single man's folly.
To sclaundre yow is no thyng myn entente,
To slander you is not at all my intention,
But to correcten that is mys I mente.
But I mean to correct what is amiss.
This tale was nat oonly toold for yow,
This tale was not only told for you,
But eek for othere mo; ye woot wel how
But also for many others; you know well
That among Cristes apostelles twelve
That among Christ's twelve apostles
Ther nas no traytour but Judas hymselve.
There was no traitor but Judas himself.
Thanne why sholde al the remenant have a blame
Then why should all the remnant have the blame
That giltlees were? By yow I seye the same,
Who were guiltless? Concerning you I say the same,
Save oonly this, if ye wol herkne me:
Save only this, if you will listen to me:
If any Judas in youre covent be,
If any Judas be in your convent,
Remoeveth hym bitymes, I yow rede,
Remove him quickly, I advise you,
If shame or los may causen any drede.
If the prospect of shame or dishonor can cause any fear.
And beeth no thyng displesed, I yow preye,
And be not at all displeased, I pray you,
But in this cas herkneth what I shal seye.
But in this case listen to what I shall say.
In Londoun was a preest, an annueleer,
In London was a priest, a chantry priest,
That therinne dwelled hadde many a yeer,
Who therein had dwelled many a year,
Which was so plesaunt and so servysable
Who was so pleasant and so attentive
Unto the wyf, where as he was at table,
Unto the woman, where he took his meals,
That she wolde suffre hym no thyng for to paye
That she would not allow him to pay anything
For bord ne clothyng, wente he never so gaye,
For board nor clothing, went he never so gay,
And spendyng silver hadde he right ynow.
And he had plenty of spending money.
Therof no fors; I wol procede as now,
That does not not matter; I will now proceed,
And tell forth my tale of the canon
That broghte this preest to confusioun.
Who brought this priest to ruin.
This false chanon cam upon a day
This false canon came upon one day
Unto this preestes chambre, wher he lay,
Unto this priest's chamber, where he stayed,
Bisechynge hym to lene hym a certeyn
Beseeching him to lend him a certain amount
Of gold, and he wolde quite it hym ageyn.
Of gold, and he would pay it back to him again.
"Leene me a marc," quod he, "but dayes three,
"Loan me a mark," said he, "for only three days,
And at my day I wol it quiten thee.
And at my assigned day I will repay it to thee.
And if so be that thow me fynde fals,
And if it so be that thou find me false,
Another day do hange me by the hals!"
The next day have me hanged by the neck!"
This preest hym took a marc, and that as swithe,
This priest gave him a mark, and that very quickly,
And this chanoun hym thanked ofte sithe,
And this canon thanked him many times,
And took his leve, and wente forth his weye,
And took his leave, and went forth on his way,
And at the thridde day broghte his moneye,
And at the third day brought his money,
And to the preest he took his gold agayn,
And to the priest he gave back his gold,
Wherof this preest was wonder glad and fayn.
For which this priest was wonderfully glad and happy.
"Certes," quod he, "no thyng anoyeth me
"Certainly," said he, "in no way does it annoy me
To lene a man a noble, or two, or thre,
To lend a man a noble, or two, or three,
Or what thyng were in my possessioun,
Or whatever thing if it were in my possession,
Whan he so trewe is of condicioun
When he is so true, of such character
That in no wise he breke wole his day;
That in no way will he fail to pay on his assigned day:
To swich a man I kan never seye nay."
To such a man I can never say no."
"What!" quod this chanoun, "sholde I be untrewe?
"What!" said this canon, "should I be untrue?
Nay, that were thyng yfallen al of newe.
Nay, that would be a thing completely without precedent.
Trouthe is a thyng that I wol evere kepe
My pledged word is a thing that I will always keep
Unto that day in which that I shal crepe
Until that day in which I shall creep
Into my grave, and ellis God forbede.
Into my grave, and God forbid it be otherwise.
Bileveth this as siker as your Crede.
Believe this is as true as your Creed.
God thanke I, and in good tyme be it sayd,
I thank God, and rightly it may be said,
That ther was nevere man yet yvele apayd
That there was never man yet suffered evil
For gold ne silver that he to me lente,
For gold or silver that he lent to me,
Ne nevere falshede in myn herte I mente.
Nor did I ever intend falsehood in my heart.
And sire," quod he, "now of my pryvetee,
And sir," said he, "now some of my secrets,
Syn ye so goodlich han been unto me,
Since you have been so goodly unto me,
And kithed to me so greet gentillesse,
And shown to me such great courtesy,
Somwhat to quyte with youre kyndenesse
Something with which to repay your kindness
I wol yow shewe, and if yow list to leere,
I will show you, and if you want to learn,
I wol yow teche pleynly the manere
I will teach you fully the manner
How I kan werken in philosophie.
How I know how to to work in alchemy.
Taketh good heede; ye shul wel seen at ye
Pay cl,ose attention; you shall well see by eye
That I wol doon a maistrie er I go."
That I will do a masterful work before I go."
"Ye," quod the preest, "ye, sire, and wol ye so?
"Yes," said the priest, "yes, sir, and will you so?
Marie, therof I pray yow hertely."
By Saint Mary, for that I pray you heartily."
"At youre comandement, sire, trewely,"
"At your commandment, sir, truly,"
Quod the chanoun, "and ellis God forbeede!"
Said the canon, "and otherwise God forbid!"
Loo, how this theef koude his service beede!
Lo, how this thief could offer his service!
Ful sooth it is that swich profred servyse
Very true it is that such a favor not asked for
Stynketh, as witnessen thise olde wyse,
Stinks, as these old wise writers bear witness,
And that ful soone I wol it verifie
And very soon I will verify it
In this chanoun, roote of al trecherie,
In (the deeds of) this canon, root of all treachery,
That everemoore delit hath and gladnesse --
Who evermore has delight and gladness --
Swiche feendly thoghtes in his herte impresse --
Such fiendish thoughts in his heart are fixed --
How Cristes peple he may to meschief brynge.
How he can bring Christ's people to mischief.
God kepe us from his false dissymulynge!
God keep us from his false dissimulation!
Noght wiste this preest with whom that he delte,
This priest knew not with whom he dealt,
Ne of his harm comynge he no thyng felte.
And of his coming harm he felt nothing.
O sely preest! O sely innocent!
O hapless priest! O hapless innocent!
With coveitise anon thou shalt be blent!
Very soon thou shalt be blinded by greed!
O gracelees, ful blynd is thy conceite,
O unfortunate, completely blind is thy mind,
No thyng ne artow war of the deceite
In no way art thou aware of the deceit
Which that this fox yshapen hath to thee!
Which this fox has destined for thee!
His wily wrenches thou ne mayst nat flee.
His cunning deceptions thou canst not flee.
Wherfore, to go to the conclusion,
Therefore, to go to the conclusion,
That refereth to thy confusion,
That refers to thy ruin,
Unhappy man, anon I wol me hye
Unhappy man, right now I will hasten myself
To tellen thyn unwit and thy folye,
To tell thy lack of prudence and thy folly,
And eek the falsnesse of that oother wrecche,
And also the falseness of that other wretch,
As ferforth as that my konnyng wol strecche.
Insofar as my skill will stretch.
This chanon was my lord, ye wolden weene?
This canon was my lord, you would suppose?
Sire hoost, in feith, and by the hevenes queene,
Sir host, in faith, and by the heaven's queen,
It was another chanoun, and nat hee,
It was another canon, and not he,
That kan an hundred foold moore subtiltee.
Who knows a hundred times more trickery.
He hath bitrayed folkes many tyme;
He has betrayed folks many a time;
Of his falsnesse it dulleth me to ryme.
It distresses me to compose rimes about his falseness.
Evere whan that I speke of his falshede,
Every time I speak of his falsehood,
For shame of hym my chekes wexen rede.
For shame of him my cheeks grow red.
Algates they bigynnen for to glowe,
At least they begin to glow,
For reednesse have I noon, right wel I knowe,
For redness have I none, very well I know,
In my visage; for fumes diverse
In my visage; for various fumes
Of metals, whiche ye han herd me reherce,
Of metals, which you have heard me rehearse,
Consumed and wasted han my reednesse.
That have consumed and wasted my redness.
Now taak heede of this chanons cursednesse!
Now pay attention to this canon's cursedness!
"Sire," quod he to the preest, "lat youre man gon
"Sir," said he to the priest, "have your man go
For quyksilver, that we it hadde anon;
For quicksilver, would that we had it right now;
And lat hym bryngen ounces two or three;
And have him bring two or three ounces;
And whan he comth, as faste shal ye see
And when he comes, quickly you shall see
A wonder thyng, which ye saugh nevere er this."
A wonderful thing, which you never saw before this."
"Sire," quod the preest, "it shal be doon, ywis."
"Sir," said the priest, "it shall be done, indeed."
He bad his servant fecchen hym this thyng,
He bad his servant fetch him this thing,
And he al redy was at his biddyng,
And he was all ready at his bidding,
And wente hym forth, and cam anon agayn
And went forth, and came right back again
With this quyksilver, shortly for to sayn,
With this quicksilver, shortly to say,
And took thise ounces thre to the chanoun;
And gave these three ounces to the canon;
And he hem leyde faire and wel adoun,
And he laid them down neatly and carefully,
And bad the servant coles for to brynge,
And bad the servant to bring coals,
That he anon myghte go to his werkynge.
So that he might go to his working right away.
The coles right anon weren yfet,
The coals right away were fetched,
And this chanoun took out a crosselet
And this canon took out a crucible
Of his bosom, and shewed it to the preest.
From his bosom, and showed it to the priest.
"This instrument," quod he, "which that thou seest,
"This instrument," said he, "which thou seest,
Taak in thyn hand, and put thyself therinne
Take in thy hand, and thyself put therein
Of this quyksilver an ounce, and heer bigynne,
An ounce of this quicksilver, and here begin,
In name of Crist, to wexe a philosofre.
In the name of Christ, to become an alchemist.
Ther been ful fewe to whiche I wolde profre
There are very few to whom I would offer
To shewen hem thus muche of my science.
To show them thus so much of my science.
For ye shul seen heer, by experience,
For you shall see here, by experience,
That this quyksilver I wol mortifye
That this quicksilver I will harden
Right in youre sighte anon, withouten lye,
Right in your sight indeed, without lie,
And make it as good silver and as fyn
And make it as good silver and as fine
As ther is any in youre purs or myn,
As there is any in your purse or mine,
Or elleswhere, and make it malliable;
Or elsewhere, and make it malleable;
And elles holdeth me fals and unable
And otherwise consider me false and unable
Amonges folk for evere to appeere.
For ever to appear amongst folk.
I have a poudre heer, that coste me deere,
I have a powder here, that cost me dearly,
Shal make al good, for it is cause of al
Shall make all good, for it is cause of all
My konnyng, which that I yow shewen shal.
My cunning, which I shall show you.
Voyde youre man, and lat hym be theroute,
Send away your man, and have him be outside,
And shette the dore, whils we been aboute
And shut the door, while we are about
Oure pryvetee, that no man us espie,
Our secret business, so that no man espy us,
Whils that we werke in this philosophie."
While we work in this science."
Al as he bad fulfilled was in dede.
All was in deed fulfilled as he commanded.
This ilke servant anonright out yede,
This same servant right away went out,
And his maister shette the dore anon,
And his master shut the door quickly,
And to hire labour spedily they gon.
And to their labor speedily they go.
This preest, at this cursed chanons biddyng,
This priest, at this cursed canon's bidding,
Upon the fir anon sette this thyng,
Upon the fire at once set this thing,
And blew the fir, and bisyed hym ful faste.
And blew the fire, and busied himself very intently.
And this chanoun into the crosselet caste
And this canon into the crucible cast
A poudre, noot I wherof that it was
A powder, I do not know of what it was
Ymaad, outher of chalk, outher of glas,
Made, either of chalk, or of glass,
Or somwhat elles, was nat worth a flye,
Or something else, that was not worth a fly,
To blynde with this preest; and bad hym hye
With which to blind this priest; and bade him hasten
The coles for to couchen al above
To lay all the coals above
The crosselet. "For in tokenyng I thee love,"
The crucible. "To serve as a sign that I love thee,"
Quod this chanoun, "thyne owene handes two
Said this canon, "thine own two hands
Shul werche al thyng which that shal heer be do."
Shall do every thing that shall here be done."
"Graunt mercy," quod the preest, and was ful glad,
"Many thanks," said the priest, and was very glad,
And couched coles as the chanoun bad.
And laid the coals as the canon bad.
And while he bisy was, this feendly wrecche,
And while he was busy, this fiendish wretch,
This false chanoun -- the foule feend hym fecche! --
This false canon -- may the foul fiend fetch him! --
Out of his bosom took a bechen cole,
Out of his bosom took a beech coal,
In which ful subtilly was maad an hole,
In which very skilfully was made a hole,
And therinne put was of silver lemaille
And therein was put of silver filings
An ounce, and stopped was, withouten faille,
An ounce, and was sealed shut, without doubt,
This hole with wex, to kepe the lemaille in.
This hole with wax, to keep the filings in.
And understondeth that this false gyn
And understand that this false device
Was nat maad ther, but it was maad bifore;
Was not made there, but it was made before;
And othere thynges I shal tellen moore
And other things I shall tell more
Herafterward, whiche that he with hym broghte.
Later, which he brought with him.
Er he cam there, hym to bigile he thoghte,
Before he came there, he intended to trick him,
And so he dide, er that they wente atwynne;
And so he did, before they went apart;
Til he had terved hym, koude he nat blynne.
Until he had skinned him, he could not cease.
It dulleth me whan that I of hym speke.
It distresses me when I speak of him.
On his falshede fayn wolde I me wreke,
I would like to avenge myself for his falsehood,
If I wiste how, but he is heere and there;
If I knew how, but he is now here and now there;
He is so variaunt, he abit nowhere.
He is so changeable, he abides nowhere.
But taketh heede now, sires, for Goddes love!
But pay attention now, sirs, for God's love!
He took his cole of which I spak above,
He took his coal of which I spoke above,
And in his hand he baar it pryvely.
And in his hand he bore it secretly.
And whiles the preest couched bisily
And while the priest busily laid
The coles, as I tolde yow er this,
The coals, as I told you before this,
This chanoun seyde, "Freend, ye doon amys.
This canon said, "Friend, you do it wrong.
This is nat couched as it oghte be;
This is not arranged as it ought to be;
But soone I shal amenden it," quod he.
But soon I shall amend it," said he.
"Now lat me medle therwith but a while,
"Now let me work with it but a while,
For of yow have I pitee, by Seint Gile!
For I have pity of you, by Saint Gile!
Ye been right hoot; I se wel how ye swete.
You are very hot; I see well how you sweat.
Have heere a clooth, and wipe awey the wete."
Have here a cloth, and wipe away the wetness."
And whiles that the preest wiped his face,
And while the priest wiped his face,
This chanoun took his cole -- with sory grace! --
This canon took his coal -- may he have bad luck! --
And leyde it above upon the myddeward
And laid it above, upon the middle
Of the crosselet, and blew wel afterward
Of the crucible, and blew well afterward
Til that the coles gonne faste brenne.
Until the coals began to burn fast.
"Now yeve us drynke," quod the chanoun thenne;
"Now give us drink," said the canon then;
"As swithe al shal be wel, I undertake.
"Soon all shall be well, I guarantee.
Sitte we doun, and lat us myrie make."
Sit we down, and let us make merry."
And whan that this chanounes bechen cole
And when this canon's beech coal
Was brent, al the lemaille out of the hole
Was burned, all the filings out of the hole
Into the crosselet fil anon adoun;
Into the crucible fell right down;
And so it moste nedes, by resoun,
And so it must be necessarily, by reason,
Syn it so evene above couched was.
Since it was placed so exactly above.
But therof wiste the preest nothyng, alas!
But of this the priest knew nothing, alas!
He demed alle the coles yliche good,
He thought all the coals equally good,
For of that sleighte he nothyng understood.
For he understood nothing of that trick.
And whan this alkamystre saugh his tyme,
And when this alchemist saw his time,
"Ris up," quod he, "sire preest, and stondeth by me;
"Rise up," said he, "sir priest, and stand by me;
And for I woot wel ingot have ye noon,
And because I know well you have no ingot,
Gooth, walketh forth, and bryngeth a chalk stoon;
Go, walk forth, and bring a chalk stone;
For I wol make it of the same shap
For I will make it of the same shape
That is an ingot, if I may han hap.
As is an ingot, if I may have such luck.
And bryngeth eek with yow a bolle or a panne
And bring also with you a bowl or a pan
Ful of water, and ye shul se wel thanne
Full of water, and you shall see well then
How that oure bisynesse shal thryve and preeve.
How our business shall thrive and succeed.
And yet, for ye shul han no mysbileeve
And yet, so that you shall have no suspicion
Ne wrong conceite of me in youre absence,
Nor wrong opinion of me in your absence,
I ne wol nat been out of youre presence,
I will not be out of your presence,
But go with yow and come with yow ageyn."
But go with you and come with you again."
The chambre dore, shortly for to seyn,
The chamber door, shortly to say,
They opened and shette, and wente hir weye.
They opened and shut, and went their way.
And forth with hem they carieden the keye,
And forth with them they carried the key,
And coome agayn withouten any delay.
And came back again without any delay.
What sholde I tarien al the longe day?
Why should I tarry all the long day?
He took the chalk and shoop it in the wise
He took the chalk and shaped it in the manner
Of an ingot, as I shal yow devyse.
Of an ingot, as I shall tell you.
I seye, he took out of his owene sleeve
I say, he took out of his own sleeve
A teyne of silver -- yvele moot he cheeve! --
A small bar of silver -- may he have evil luck! --
Which that ne was nat but an ounce of weighte.
Which was not more than an ounce of weight.
And taaketh heede now of his cursed sleighte!
And pay attention now to his cursed trick!
He shoop his ingot in lengthe and in breede
He shaped his ingot in the length and in the breadth
Of this teyne, withouten any drede,
Of this small bar, without any doubt,
So slyly that the preest it nat espide,
So slyly that the priest did not see it,
And in his sleve agayn he gan it hide,
And in his sleeve again he did hide it,
And fro the fir he took up his mateere,
And from the fire he took up his material,
And in th'yngot putte it with myrie cheere,
And put it in the ingot with merry demeanor,
And in the water-vessel he it caste,
And in the pan of water he cast it,
Whan that hym luste, and bad the preest as faste,
When it pleased him, and commanded the priest quickly,
"Loke what ther is; put in thyn hand and grope.
"See what is there; put in thy hand and grope.
Thow fynde shalt ther silver, as I hope."
Thou shalt find there silver, as I believe."
What, devel of helle, sholde it elles be?
What else, devil of hell, should it be?
Shaving of silver silver is, pardee!
Shaving of silver is silver, by God!
He putte his hand in and took up a teyne
He put his hand in and took up a small bar
Of silver fyn, and glad in every veyne
Of pure silver, and glad in every vein
Was this preest, whan he saugh it was so.
Was this priest, when he saw it was so.
"Goddes blessyng, and his moodres also,
"God's blessing, and his mother's also,
And alle halwes, have ye, sire chanoun,"
And all saints, have you (in their protection), sir canon,"
Seyde the preest, "and I hir malisoun,
Said the priest, "and may I have their curse,
But, and ye vouche-sauf to techen me
But, if you condescend to teach me
This noble craft and this subtilitee,
This noble craft and this esoteric art,
I wol be youre in al that evere I may."
I will be yours in all that ever I can."
Quod the chanoun, "Yet wol I make assay
Said the canon, "Yet I will make trial
The seconde tyme, that ye may taken heede
The second time, that you may pay attention
And been expert of this, and in youre neede
And be expert concerning this, and when you are in need
Another day assaye in myn absence
Some other day in my absence to try out
This disciplyne and this crafty science.
This discipline and this ingenious science.
Lat take another ounce," quod he tho,
Let's take another ounce," said he then,
"Of quyksilver, withouten wordes mo,
"Of quicksilver, without more words,
And do therwith as ye han doon er this
And do therewith as you have done before this
With that oother, which that now silver is."
With that other, which now is silver."
This preest hym bisieth in al that he kan
This priest busies himself in all that he knows how
To doon as this chanoun, this cursed man,
To do as this canon, this cursed man,
Comanded hym, and faste blew the fir,
Commanded him, and blew hard on the fire,
For to come to th' effect of his desir.
In order to come to the realization of his desire.
And this chanon, right in the meene while,
And this canon, at exactly the same time,
Al redy was this preest eft to bigile,
Was all ready to beguile this priest again,
And for a contenaunce in his hand he bar
And for show in his hand he bore
An holwe stikke -- taak kep and be war! --
A hollow stick -- pay attention and beware! --
In the ende of which an ounce, and namoore,
In the end of which an ounce, and no more,
Of silver lemaille put was, as bifore
Of silver filings was put, as before
Was in his cole, and stopped with wex weel
Was in his coal, and well sealed shut with wax
For to kepe in his lemaille every deel.
To keep in his filings every bit.
And whil this preest was in his bisynesse,
And while this priest was busy with his work,
This chanoun with his stikke gan hym dresse
This canon with his stick began to go
To hym anon, and his poudre caste in
To him right away, and his powder cast in
As he dide er -- the devel out of his skyn
As he did before-- the devil out of his skin
Hym terve, I pray to God, for his falshede!
Flay him, I pray to God, for his falsehood!
For he was evere fals in thoght and dede --
For he was ever false in thought and deed --
And with this stikke, above the crosselet,
And with this stick, above the crucible,
That was ordeyned with that false jet,
That was prepared with that false contrivance,
He stired the coles til relente gan
He stirred the coals until it began to melt
The wex agayn the fir, as every man,
The wax next to the fire, as every man,
But it a fool be, woot wel it moot nede,
Unless he be a fool, knows well it must by necessity,
And al that in the stikke was out yede,
And all that was in the stick went out,
And in the crosselet hastily it fel.
And into the crucible it quickly fell.
Now, good sires, what wol ye bet than wel?
Now, good sirs, what more will you have?
Whan that this preest thus was bigiled ageyn,
When this priest was thus beguiled again,
Supposynge noght but treuthe, sooth to seyn,
Supposing nothing but truth, sooth to say,
He was so glad that I kan nat expresse
He was so glad that I can not express
In no manere his myrthe and his gladnesse;
In any manner his mirth and his gladness;
And to the chanoun he profred eftsoone
And to the canon he offered again
Body and good. "Ye," quod the chanoun soone,
Body and possessions. "Yes," quickly said the canon,
"Though poure I be, crafty thou shalt me fynde.
"Though I be poor, thou shalt find me skilfull.
I warne thee, yet is ther moore bihynde.
I warn thee, there is yet more to come.
Is ther any coper herinne?" seyde he.
Is there any copper here?" said he.
"Ye," quod the preest, "sire, I trowe wel ther be."
"Yes," said the priest, "sir, I believe well there is some."
"Elles go bye us som, and that as swithe;
"Otherwise go buy us some, and do that quickly;
Now, goode sire, go forth thy wey and hy the."
Now, good sir, go forth thy way and hurry thee."
He wente his wey, and with the coper cam,
He went his way, and with the copper came back,
And this chanon it in his handes nam,
And this canon took it in his hands,
And of that coper weyed out but an ounce.
And of that copper weighed out only an ounce.
Al to symple is my tonge to pronounce,
All too simple is my tongue to pronounce,
As ministre of my wit, the doublenesse
As servant of my wit, the duplicity
Of this chanoun, roote of alle cursednesse!
Of this canon, root of all cursedness!
He semed freendly to hem that knewe hym noght,
He seemed friendly to those that did not know him,
But he was feendly bothe in werk and thoght.
But he was fiendish both in deed and thought.
It weerieth me to telle of his falsnesse,
It wearies me to tell of his falseness,
And nathelees yet wol I it expresse,
And nonetheless I will yet express it,
To th'entente that men may be war therby,
With the intention that men may be warned by this,
And for noon oother cause, trewely.
And for no other cause, truly.
He putte this ounce of coper in the crosselet,
He put this ounce of copper in the crucible,
And on the fir as swithe he hath it set,
And on the fire quickly he has set it,
And caste in poudre, and made the preest to blowe,
And cast in powder, and made the priest to blow,
And in his werkyng for to stoupe lowe,
And in his working to stoop low,
As he dide er -- and al nas but a jape;
As he did before -- and all was nothing but a trick;
Right as hym liste, the preest he made his ape!
Exactly as he wished, he made the priest his ape!
And afterward in the ingot he it caste,
And afterward he cast the ingot in it,
And in the panne putte it at the laste
And put it at the last into the pan
Of water, and in he putte his owene hand,
Of water, and in he put his own hand,
And in his sleve (as ye biforen-hand
And in his sleeve (as you before-hand
Herde me telle) he hadde a silver teyne.
Heard me tell) he had a small bar of silver.
He slyly took it out, this cursed heyne,
He slyly took it out, this cursed rascal,
Unwityng this preest of his false craft,
This priest not knowing of his false craft,
And in the pannes botme he hath it laft;
And in the pan's bottom he has left it;
And in the water rombled to and fro,
And in the water groped noisily about to and fro,
And wonder pryvely took up also
And wonderfully secretly took up also
The coper teyne, noght knowynge this preest,
The copper bar, this priest not knowing,
And hidde it, and hym hente by the breest,
And hid it, and grabbed him by his coat,
And to hym spak, and thus seyde in his game:
And to him spoke, and thus said jokingly:
"Stoupeth adoun. By God, ye be to blame!
"Stoop down. By God, you are to blame!
Helpeth me now, as I dide yow whileer;
Help me now, as I did you before;
Putte in youre hand, and looketh what is theer."
Put in your hand, and see what is there."
This preest took up this silver teyne anon,
This priest quickly took up this silver bar,
And thanne seyde the chanoun, "Lat us gon
And then said the canon, "Let us go
With thise thre teynes, whiche that we han wroght,
With these three bars, which we have wrought,
To som goldsmyth and wite if they been oght,
To some goldsmith and learn if they are worth anything,
For, by my feith, I nolde, for myn hood,
For, by my faith, I would not (have them), for (the cost of) my hood,
But if that they were silver fyn and good,
Unless they be silver pure and good,
And that as swithe preeved it shal bee."
And that very quickly shall be tested."
Unto the goldsmyth with thise teynes three
Unto the goldsmith with these three bars
They wente and putte thise teynes in assay
They went and put these bars to the test
To fir and hamer; myghte no man seye nay,
Of fire and hammer; no man could say nay,
But that they weren as hem oghte be.
But that they were as they ought to be.
This sotted preest, who was gladder than he?
This deluded priest, who was gladder than he?
Was nevere brid gladder agayn the day,
Was never bird more glad at daybreak,
Ne nyghtyngale, in the sesoun of May,
Nor nightingale in the season of May,
Was nevere noon that luste bet to synge;
Was never none that was more eager to sing;
Ne lady lustier in carolynge,
Nor lady more enthusiastic in singing carols to spring,
Or for to speke of love and wommanhede,
Or to speak of love and womanhood,
Ne knyght in armes to doon an hardy dede,
Nor knight in arms to do a hardy deed,
To stonden in grace of his lady deere,
To stand in the good graces of his dear lady,
Than hadde this preest this soory craft to leere.
Than this priest had to learn this sorry craft.
And to the chanoun thus he spak and seyde:
And to the canon thus he spoke and said:
"For love of God, that for us alle deyde,
"For love of God, Who died for us all,
And as I may deserve it unto yow,
And as I may deserve (to have) it from you,
What shal this receite coste? Telleth now!"
What shall this recipe cost? Tell now!"
"By oure Lady," quod this chanon, "it is deere,
"By our Lady," said this canon, "it is expensive,
I warne yow wel; for save I and a frere,
I warn you well; for except for me and a friar,
In Engelond ther kan no man it make."
There is no man in England who can make it."
"No fors," quod he, "now, sire, for Goddes sake,
"No matter," said he, "now, sir, for God's sake,
What shal I paye? Telleth me, I preye."
What shall I pay? Tell me, I pray."
"Ywis," quod he, "it is ful deere, I seye.
"Indeed," said he, "as I say, it is very expensive.
Sire, at o word, if that thee list it have,
Sir, at one word, if thou want to have it,
Ye shul paye fourty pound, so God me save!
You must pay forty pounds, so help me God!
And nere the freendshipe that ye dide er this
And were it not for the act of friendship that before this you did
To me, ye sholde paye moore, ywis."
To me, you should pay more, indeed."
This preest the somme of fourty pound anon
This priest right away the sum of forty pounds
Of nobles fette, and took hem everichon
Of nobles fetched, and gave every one of them
To this chanoun for this ilke receite.
To this canon for this same recipe.
Al his werkyng nas but fraude and deceite.
All his working was nothing but fraud and deceit.
"Sire preest," he seyde, "I kepe han no loos
"Sir priest," he said, "I do not care to have fame
Of my craft, for I wolde it kept were cloos;
For my craft, for I would that it were kept confidential;
And, as ye love me, kepeth it secree.
And, as you love me, keep it secret.
For, and men knewen al my soutiltee,
For, if men knew of all my esoteric skill,
By God, they wolden han so greet envye
By God, they would have so great envy
To me by cause of my philosophye
Of me because of my science
I sholde be deed; ther were noon oother weye."
I should be dead; there would be no other way."
"God it forbeede," quod the preest, "what sey ye?
"God forbid it," said the priest, "what say you?
Yet hadde I levere spenden al the good
Yet would I rather spend all the wealth
Which that I have, and elles wexe I wood,
That I have, and otherwise I would rather go mad,
Than that ye sholden falle in swich mescheef."
Than that you should fall in such distress."
"For youre good wyl, sire, have ye right good preef,"
"For your good will, sir, you have givem right good proof,"
Quod the chanoun, "and farwel, grant mercy!"
Said the canon, "and farewell, many thanks!"
He wente his wey, and never the preest hym sy
He went his way, and never the priest him saw
After that day; and whan that this preest shoolde
After that day; and when this priest should
Maken assay, at swich tyme as he wolde,
At such time as he wanted, make a trial
Of this receit, farwel! It wolde nat be.
Of this recipe, farewell! It would not work.
Lo, thus byjaped and bigiled was he!
Lo, thus tricked and beguiled was he!
Thus maketh he his introduccioun,
Thus he makes his introductory gambit,
To brynge folk to hir destruccioun.
To bring folk to their destruction.
Considereth, sires, how that, in ech estaat,
Consider, sirs, how, in each social rank,
Bitwixe men and gold ther is debaat
Betwixt men and gold there is conflict
So ferforth that unnethes is ther noon.
So widespread that there is hardly any gold left.
This multiplying blent so many oon
This transmutation blinds so many a one
That in good feith I trowe that it bee
That in good faith I believe that it is
The cause grettest of swich scarsetee.
The greatest cause of such scarcity.
Philosophres speken so mystily
Philosophers speak so mystically
In this craft that men kan nat come therby,
About this craft that men can not come to it,
For any wit that men han now-a-dayes.
For any wit that men have now-a-days.
They mowe wel chiteren as doon jayes,
They may well chatter as do jays,
And in hir termes sette hir lust and peyne,
And in their technical terms set their desire and pain,
But to hir purpos shul they nevere atteyne.
But to their purpose shall they never attain.
A man may lightly lerne, if he have aught,
A man can easily learn, if he have anything,
To multiplie, and brynge his good to naught!
To transmute metals, and bring his wealth to nothing!
Lo! swich a lucre is in this lusty game,
Lo! such a profit is in this pleasing game,
A mannes myrthe it wol turne unto grame,
It will turn a man's mirth into sorrow,
And empten also grete and hevye purses,
And empty also great and heavy purses,
And maken folk for to purchacen curses
And make folk to deserve curses
Of hem that han hir good therto ylent.
Of those who have lent their wealth for that purpose.
O, fy, for shame! They that han been brent,
O, fie, for shame! Those who have been burned,
Allas, kan they nat flee the fires heete?
Alas, can they not flee the fire's heat?
Ye that it use, I rede ye it leete,
You who use it, I advise you let it go,
Lest ye lese al; for bet than nevere is late.
Lest you lose all; for late is better than never.
Nevere to thryve were to long a date.
Never to thrive would be too long a time.
Though ye prolle ay, ye shul it nevere fynde.
Though you search forever, you shall never find it.
Ye been as boold as is Bayard the blynde,
You are as heedless as is Bayard the blind horse,
That blondreth forth and peril casteth noon.
That blunders forth and takes account of no peril.
He is as boold to renne agayn a stoon
He is as likely to run against a stone
As for to goon bisides in the weye.
As to go around it in the road.
So faren ye that multiplie, I seye.
So fare you who multiply, I say.
If that youre eyen kan nat seen aright,
If your eyes can not see clearly,
Looke that youre mynde lakke noght his sight.
See that your mind lacks nothing of its sight.
For though ye looken never so brode and stare,
For though you look never so broadly and stare,
Ye shul nothyng wynne on that chaffare,
You shall gain nothing on that transaction,
But wasten al that ye may rape and renne.
But waste all that you can steal and carry away.
Withdraweth the fir, lest it to faste brenne;
Withdraw the fire, lest it burn too fast;
Medleth namoore with that art, I mene,
Meddle no more with that art, I mean,
For if ye doon, youre thrift is goon ful clene.
For if you do, your prosperity is completely gone.
And right as swithe I wol yow tellen heere
And very quickly I will you tell here
What philosophres seyn in this mateere.
What alchemists say in this matter.
Lo, thus seith Arnold of the Newe Toun,
Lo, thus says Arnold of the New Town,
As his Rosarie maketh mencioun;
As his book Rosari makes mention;
He seith right thus, withouten any lye:
He says right thus, without any lie:
"Ther may no man mercurie mortifie
"There is no man who can harden mercury
But it be with his brother knowlechyng";
Unless it be with his brother's knowledge";
How [be] that he which that first seyde this thyng
Although he who first said this thing
Of philosophres fader was, Hermes;
Was father of philosophers, Hermes Trismegistus;
He seith how that the dragon, doutelees,
He says that the dragon, doubtless,
Ne dyeth nat but if that he be slayn
Does not die unless he be slain
With his brother; and that is for to sayn,
By his brother; and that is to say,
By the dragon, Mercurie, and noon oother
By the dragon, Mercury, and none other
He understood, and brymstoon by his brother,
He understood, and brimstone by his brother,
That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe.
That out of Sol (gold) and Luna (silver) were drawn.
"And therfore," seyde he -- taak heede to my sawe --
"And therefore," said he -- take heed of my words --
"Lat no man bisye hym this art for to seche,
"Let no man busy himself to seek this art,
But if that he th'entencioun and speche
Unless he the meaning and speech
Of philosophres understonde kan;
Of alchemists can understand;
And if he do, he is a lewed man.
And if he do, he is an ignorant man.
For this science and this konnyng," quod he,
For this science and this cunning," said he,
"Is of the secree of the secretes, pardee."
"Concerns the secret of the secrets, by God."
Also ther was a disciple of Plato,
Also there was a disciple of Plato,
That on a tyme seyde his maister to,
That one time said to his master,
As his book Senior wol bere witnesse,
As his book Senior will bear witness,
And this was his demande in soothfastnesse:
And this was his question in truth:
"Telle me the name of the privee stoon."
"Tell me the name of the secret stone."
And Plato answerde unto hym anoon,
And Plato answered unto him straightaway,
"Take the stoon that men name Titanos."
"Take the stone that men name Titanos."
"Which is that?" quod he. "Magnasia is the same,"
"What is that?" said he. "Magnesia is the same,"
Seyde Plato. "Ye, sire, and is it thus?
Said Plato. "Yes, sir, and is it thus?
This is ignotum per ignocius.
This is explaining the unknown by the more unknown.
What is Magnasia, good sire, I yow preye?"
What is Magnesia, good sir, I pray you?"
"It is a water that is maad, I seye,
"It is a liquid that is made, I say,
Of elementes foure," quod Plato.
Of the four elements," said Plato.
"Telle me the roote, good sire," quod he tho,
Good sir," said he then, "Tell me the basic constituent
"Of that water, if it be youre wil."
"Of that liquid, if it be your wish."
"Nay, nay," quod Plato, "certein, that I nyl.
"Nay, nay," said Plato, "certainly, that I will not.
The philosophres sworn were everychoon
The alchemists were sworn every single one
That they sholden discovere it unto noon,
That they should reveal it unto no one,
Ne in no book it write in no manere.
Nor in any book write it in any way.
For unto Crist it is so lief and deere
For unto Christ it is so beloved and dear
That he wol nat that it discovered bee,
That He does not wish that it be discovered,
But where it liketh to his deitee
Except where it is pleasing to his deity
Men for t'enspire, and eek for to deffende
To enlighten men, and also to forbid
Whom that hym liketh; lo, this is the ende."
Whomever he pleases; lo, this is the end."
Thanne conclude I thus, sith that God of hevene
Then I conclude thus, since God of heaven
Ne wil nat that the philosophres nevene
Does not wish that the alchemists should tell
How that a man shal come unto this stoon,
How a man shall come unto this stone,
I rede, as for the beste, lete it goon.
I advise, as for the best, let it go.
For whoso maketh God his adversarie,
For whoever makes God his adversary,
As for to werken any thyng in contrarie
As to do any thing in contrary
Of his wil, certes, never shal he thryve,
To his will, certainly, never shall he thrive,
Thogh that he multiplie terme of his lyve.
Though he practice alchemy all his life.
And there a poynt, for ended is my tale.
And there (put) a period, for my tale is ended.
God sende every trewe man boote of his bale!
God send every true man remedy for his troubles!
