"Sire Clerk of Oxenford," oure Hooste sayde,
"Sir Clerk of Oxford," our Host said,
"Ye ryde as coy and stille as dooth a mayde
"You ride as demure and quiet as does a maid
Were newe spoused, sittynge at the bord;
Who is just married, sitting at the banquet table;
This day ne herde I of youre tonge a word.
This day I heard not one word from your tongue.
I trowe ye studie aboute som sophyme;
I suppose you are thinking about some logical problem;
But Salomon seith `every thyng hath tyme.'
But Solomon says `every thing has its time.'
"For Goddes sake, as beth of bettre cheere!
"For God's sake, cheer up!
It is no tyme for to studien heere.
It is no time to study here.
Telle us som myrie tale, by youre fey!
Tell us some merry tale, by your faith!
For what man that is entred in a pley,
For whatever man is entered in a game,
He nedes moot unto the pley assente.
He of necessity must assent unto the rules.
But precheth nat, as freres doon in Lente,
But preach not, as friars do in Lent,
To make us for oure olde synnes wepe,
To make us weep for our old sins,
Ne that thy tale make us nat to slepe.
And let not thy tale put us to sleep.
"Telle us som murie thyng of aventures.
"Tell us some merry thing of adventures.
Youre termes, youre colours, and youre figures,
Your technical terms, your figures of speech, and your rhetorical devices,
Keepe hem in stoor til so be ye endite
Keep them in reserve until it so be that you compose
Heigh style, as whan that men to kynges write.
High style, as when men write to kings.
Speketh so pleyn at this tyme, we yow preye,
Speak so plainly at this time, we pray of you,
That we may understonde what ye seye."
That we can understand what you say."
This worthy clerk benignely answerde:
This worthy clerk graciously answered:
"Hooste," quod he, "I am under youre yerde;
"Host," said he, "I am under your authority;
Ye han of us as now the governance,
You have the governance of us now,
And therfore wol I do yow obeisance,
And therefore will I obey you,
As fer as resoun axeth, hardily.
So far as reason demands, indeed.
I wol yow telle a tale which that I
I will tell you a tale which I
Lerned at Padowe of a worthy clerk,
Learned at Padua from a worthy clerk,
As preved by his wordes and his werk.
As was proven by his words and his work.
He is now deed and nayled in his cheste;
He is now dead and nailed in his coffin;
I prey to God so yeve his soule reste!
I pray to God to give his soul rest.
"Fraunceys Petrak, the lauriat poete,
"Francis Petrarch, the laureate poet,
Highte this clerk, whos rethorike sweete
Was called this clerk, whose sweet rhetoric
Enlumyned al Ytaille of poetrie,
Illuminated all Italy with poetry,
As Lynyan dide of philosophie,
As Lynyan did with philosophy,
Or lawe, or oother art particuler;
Or law, or other specialized field of study;
But Deeth, that wol nat suffre us dwellen heer,
But Death, that will not allow us to remain here,
But as it were a twynklyng of an ye,
But as if it were a twinkling of an eye,
Hem bothe hath slayn, and alle shul we dye.
Has slain them both, and we all shall die.
"But forth to tellen of this worthy man
"But forth to tell of this worthy man
That taughte me this tale, as I bigan,
That taught me this tale, as I began,
I seye that first with heigh stile he enditeth,
I say that first with high style he composes,
Er he the body of his tale writeth,
Before he writes the body of his tale,
A prohemye, in the which discryveth he
A proem, in which he describes
Pemond and of Saluces the contree,
Piedmont and the country of Saluces,
And speketh of Apennyn, the hilles hye,
And speaks of the Apennines, the high hills,
That been the boundes of West Lumbardye,
That are the boundaries of West Lombardy,
And of Mount Vesulus in special,
And of Mount Vesulus in particular,
Where as the Poo out of a welle smal
Where the Po out of a small well
Taketh his firste spryngyng and his sours,
Takes its first springing and its source,
That estward ay encresseth in his cours
That eastward ever increases in its course
To Emele-ward, to Ferrare, and Venyse,
Toward Emelia, to Ferrara, and Venice,
The which a long thyng were to devyse.
Which would be a long thing to relate.
And trewely, as to my juggement,
And truly, as to my judgment,
Me thynketh it a thyng impertinent,
It seems to me a thing irrelevant,
Save that he wole conveyen his mateere;
Save that he wishes to introduce his subject matter;
But this his tale, which that ye may heere."
But this is his tale, which you may hear."
A markys whilom lord was of that lond,
A marquis once was lord of that land,
As were his worthy eldres hym bifore;
As were his worthy elders before him;
And obeisant, ay redy to his hond,
And obedient, ever ready to his hand (to do his commands),
Were alle his liges, bothe lasse and moore.
Were all his subjects, both lesser ranks and nobles.
Thus in delit he lyveth, and hath doon yoore,
Thus in delight he lives, and has done since long before,
Biloved and drad, thurgh favour of Fortune,
Beloved and feared, through favor of Fortune,
Bothe of his lordes and of his commune.
Both by his lords and by his citizenry.
Therwith he was, to speke as of lynage,
Moreover he was, to speak of lineage,
The gentilleste yborn of Lumbardye,
The most noble born in Lombardy,
A fair persone, and strong, and yong of age,
A handsome person, and strong, and young of age,
And ful of honour and of curteisye;
And full of honor and of courtesy;
Discreet ynogh his contree for to gye,
Discreet enough to govern his country,
Save in somme thynges that he was to blame;
Except in some things he was to blame;
And Walter was this yonge lordes name.
And Walter was this young lord's name.
I blame hym thus: that he considered noght
I blame him thus: that he considered not
In tyme comynge what myghte hym bityde,
In time coming what might happen to him,
But on his lust present was al his thoght,
But on his immediate pleasure was all his thought,
As for to hauke and hunte on every syde.
Such as to hawk and hunt on every side.
Wel ny alle othere cures leet he slyde,
Well nigh all other cares he let slip away,
And eek he nolde -- and that was worst of alle --
And also he would not -- and that was worst of all --
Wedde no wyf, for noght that may bifalle.
Wed any woman, for anything that may befall.
Oonly that point his peple bar so soore
Only that point his people took so badly
That flokmeele on a day they to hym wente,
That in groups on one day they went to him,
And oon of hem, that wisest was of loore --
And one of them, that wisest was in learning --
Or elles that the lord best wolde assente
Or else the one that the lord most readily would consent
That he sholde telle hym what his peple mente,
That he should tell him what his people meant,
Or elles koude he shewe wel swich mateere --
Or else he knew well how to present such a matter --
He to the markys seyde as ye shul heere:
He to the marquis said as you shall hear:
"O noble markys, youre humanitee
"O noble marquis, your graciousness
Asseureth us and yeveth us hardinesse,
Makes us confident and gives us boldness,
As ofte as tyme is of necessitee,
As often as it is time (to do so) by necessity,
That we to yow mowe telle oure hevynesse.
That we to you may tell our sorrow.
Accepteth, lord, now of youre gentillesse
Grant, lord, now of your nobility
That we with pitous herte unto yow pleyne,
That we with pitiful heart may unto you complain,
And lat youre eres nat my voys desdeyne.
And let your ears not disdain (to hear) my voice.
"Al have I noght to doone in this mateere
"Although I have nothing to do in this matter
Moore than another man hath in this place,
More than another man has in this place,
Yet for as muche as ye, my lord so deere,
Yet for as much as you, my lord so dear,
Han alwey shewed me favour and grace
Have always shown me favor and grace
I dar the bettre aske of yow a space
I dare the more confidently to ask of you a time
Of audience to shewen oure requeste,
Of hearing to present our request,
And ye, my lord, to doon right as yow leste.
And you, my lord, to do right as it may please you.
"For certes, lord, so wel us liketh yow
"For certainly, lord, so well you please us
And al youre werk, and evere han doon, that we
And all your actions, and ever have done so, that we
Ne koude nat us self devysen how
Could not ourselves imagine how
We myghte lyven in moore felicitee,
We might live in more happiness,
Save o thyng, lord, if it youre wille be,
Save one thing, lord, if it be your will,
That for to been a wedded man yow leste;
That you would desire to be a wedded man;
Thanne were youre peple in sovereyn hertes reste.
Then your people would be in complete peace of mind.
"Boweth youre nekke under that blisful yok
"Bow your neck under that blissful yoke
Of soveraynetee, noght of servyse,
Of sovereignty, not of servitude,
Which that men clepe spousaille or wedlok;
Which men call marriage or wedlock;
And thenketh, lord, among youre thoghtes wyse
And think, lord, among your wise thoughts
How that oure dayes passe in sondry wyse,
How our days pass in various ways,
For thogh we slepe, or wake, or rome, or ryde,
For though we sleep, or wake, or roam, or ride,
Ay fleeth the tyme; it nyl no man abyde.
Ever flees the time; it will wait for no man.
"And thogh youre grene youthe floure as yit,
"And though your green youth flowers as yet,
In crepeth age alwey, as stille as stoon,
In creeps age always, as still as stone,
And deeth manaceth every age, and smyt
And death menaces every age, and smites
In ech estaat, for ther escapeth noon;
In each rank, for there escapes no one;
And al so certein as we knowe echoon
And just as certainly as we know, each one of us,
That we shul deye, as uncerteyn we alle
That we shall die, as uncertain we all
Been of that day whan deeth shal on us falle.
Are of that day when death shall on us fall.
"Accepteth thanne of us the trewe entente,
"Accept then the true intent of us,
That nevere yet refuseden youre heeste,
Who never yet refused your command,
And we wol, lord, if that ye wole assente,
And we will, lord, if you will assent,
Chese yow a wyf, in short tyme atte leeste,
Chose a wife for you, in short time at the least,
Born of the gentilleste and of the meeste
Born of the most noble and of the greatest (in rank)
Of al this land, so that it oghte seme
Of all this land, so that it must seem
Honour to God and yow, as we kan deeme.
Honor to God and you, so far as we can judge.
"Delivere us out of al this bisy drede,
"Deliver us out of all this constant fear,
And taak a wyf, for hye Goddes sake!
And take a wife, for high God's sake!
For if it so bifelle, as God forbede,
For if it so happen, may God forbid,
That thurgh youre deeth youre lyne sholde slake,
That through your death your line should die out,
And that a straunge successour sholde take
And that a foreign successor should take
Youre heritage, O wo were us alyve!
Your heritage, O woe would it be to us in our lifetime!
Wherfore we pray you hastily to wyve."
Wherefore we pray you hastily to take a wife."
Hir meeke preyere and hir pitous cheere
Their meek prayer and their pitiful manner
Made the markys herte han pitee.
Made the marquis's heart have pity.
"Ye wol," quod he, "myn owene peple deere,
"You want," said he, "my own people dear,
To that I nevere erst thoughte streyne me.
That which I never before thought to compel myself.
I me rejoysed of my liberte,
I rejoiced in my liberty,
That seelde tyme is founde in mariage;
That seldom is found in marriage;
Ther I was free, I moot been in servage.
Where I was free, I must be in servitude.
"But nathelees I se youre trewe entente,
"But nevertheless I see your true intent,
And truste upon youre wit, and have doon ay;
And trust upon your intelligence, and always have done so;
Wherfore of my free wyl I wole assente
Therefore of my free will I will assent
To wedde me, as soone as evere I may.
To wed, as soon as ever I can.
But ther as ye han profred me to-day
But insofar as you have offered me to-day
To chese me a wyf, I yow relesse
To choose me a wife, I release you
That choys and prey yow of that profre cesse.
(From making) that choice and pray you to cease (making) that offer.
"For God it woot, that children ofte been
"For God knows it, that children often are
Unlyk hir worthy eldres hem bifore;
Unlike their worthy elders (who came) before them;
Bountee comth al of God, nat of the streen
All goodness comes from God, not from the lineage
Of which they been engendred and ybore.
By which they are conceived and born.
I truste in Goddes bountee, and therfore
I trust in God's goodness, and therefore
My mariage and myn estaat and reste
My marriage and my estate and peace of mind
I hym bitake; he may doon as hym leste.
I entrust to him; he may do as he pleases.
"Lat me allone in chesynge of my wyf --
"Let me alone in the choosing of my wife --
That charge upon my bak I wole endure.
That responsibility upon my back I will endure.
But I yow preye, and charge upon youre lyf,
But I you pray, and order you upon your life,
What wyf that I take, ye me assure
Whatever wife I take, you me assure
To worshipe hire, whil that hir lyf may dure,
To honor her, while her life may endure,
In word and werk, bothe heere and everywheere,
In word and deed, both here and everywhere,
As she an emperoures doghter weere.
As if she were an emperor's daughter.
"And forthermoore, this shal ye swere: that ye
"And furthermore, this shall you swear: that you
Agayn my choys shul neither grucche ne stryve;
Against my choice shall neither grouch nor strive;
For sith I shal forgoon my libertee
For since I must forgo my liberty
At youre requeste, as evere moot I thryve,
At your request, as ever I may thrive,
Ther as myn herte is set, ther wol I wyve;
Where my heart is set, there will I take a wife;
And but ye wole assente in swich manere,
And unless you will assent in such a manner,
I prey yow, speketh namoore of this matere."
I pray you, speak no more of this matter."
With hertely wyl they sworen and assenten
With heartfelt will they swore and assent
To al this thyng -- ther seyde no wight nay --
To all this thing -- there said no person nay --
Bisekynge hym of grace, er that they wenten,
Beseeching him of grace, before they went,
That he wolde graunten hem a certein day
That he would grant them a fixed day
Of his spousaille, as soone as evere he may;
Of his wedding, as soon as ever he can;
For yet alwey the peple somwhat dredde,
For yet always the people somewhat dreaded,
Lest that the markys no wyf wolde wedde.
Lest the marquis no wife would wed.
He graunted hem a day, swich as hym leste,
He granted them a day, such as he pleased,
On which he wolde be wedded sikerly,
On which he would be wedded surely,
And seyde he dide al this at hir requeste.
And said he did all this at their request.
And they, with humble entente, buxomly,
And they, with humble good will, obediently,
Knelynge upon hir knees ful reverently,
Kneeling upon their knees full reverently,
Hym thonken alle; and thus they han an ende
All thanked him; and thus they have a conclusion
Of hire entente, and hoom agayn they wende.
In accord with their wishes, and home again they go.
And heerupon he to his officeres
And thereupon he to his officers
Comaundeth for the feste to purveye,
Commands the feast to prepare,
And to his privee knyghtes and squieres
And to his household knights and squires
Swich charge yaf as hym liste on hem leye;
Gave such orders as he desired to lay on them;
And they to his comandement obeye,
And they to his commandment obey,
And ech of hem dooth al his diligence
And each of them does all his efforts
To doon unto the feeste reverence.
To lend honor unto the feast.
Noght fer fro thilke paleys honurable,
Not far from that same noble palace,
Wher as this markys shoop his mariage,
Where this marquis planned his marriage,
There stood a throop, of site delitable,
There stood a small village, in a delightful location,
In which that povre folk of that village
In which poor folk of that village
Hadden hir beestes and hir herbergage,
Had their beasts and their dwellings
And of hire labour tooke hir sustenance,
And of their labor took their sustenance,
After that the erthe yaf hem habundance.
According to what produce the earth gave them.
Amonges thise povre folk ther dwelte a man
Among these poor folk there dwelt a man
Which that was holden povrest of hem alle;
Who was considered poorest of them all;
But hye God somtyme senden kan
But high God sometimes can send
His grace into a litel oxes stalle;
His grace into a little ox's stall;
Janicula men of that throop hym calle.
Janicula men of that village call him.
A doghter hadde he, fair ynogh to sighte,
A daughter had he, fair enough in appearance,
And Grisildis this yonge mayden highte.
And Griselda this young maiden was called.
But for to speke of vertuous beautee,
But to speak of virtuous beauty,
Thanne was she oon the faireste under sonne;
Then was she the fairest of all under sun;
For povreliche yfostred up was she,
Because she was raised in poverty,
No likerous lust was thurgh hire herte yronne.
No sensual desire had run through her heart.
Wel ofter of the welle than of the tonne
Much more often of the well than of the wine barrel
She drank, and for she wolde vertu plese,
She drank, and because she would satisfy the demands of virtue
She knew wel labour but noon ydel ese.
She knew well labor but no idle ease.
But thogh this mayde tendre were of age,
But though this maid was tender of age,
Yet in the brest of hire virginitee
Yet in the breast of her virginity
Ther was enclosed rype and sad corage;
There was enclosed a mature and steadfast spirit;
And in greet reverence and charitee
And in great reverence and charity
Hir olde povre fader fostred shee.
Her old poor father she cared for.
A fewe sheep, spynnynge, on feeld she kepte;
A few sheep, while spinning, on field she kept;
She wolde noght been ydel til she slepte.
She would not be idle until she slept.
And whan she homward cam, she wolde brynge
And when she homeward came, she would bring
Wortes or othere herbes tymes ofte,
Cabbages or other greens very often,
The whiche she shredde and seeth for hir lyvynge,
Which she shredded and boiled for their sustenance
And made hir bed ful hard and nothyng softe;
And made her bed full hard and not at all soft;
And ay she kepte hir fadres lyf on-lofte
And ever she sustained her father's life
With everich obeisaunce and diligence
With every obedience and diligence
That child may doon to fadres reverence.
That child may do to father's reverence.
Upon Grisilde, this povre creature,
Upon Griselda, this poor creature,
Ful ofte sithe this markys sette his ye
Very many times this marquis set his eye
As he on huntyng rood paraventure;
By chance, as he on hunting rode;
And whan it fil that he myghte hire espye,
And when it happened that he might see her,
He noght with wantown lookyng of folye
He not with lecherous looking of folly
His eyen caste on hire, but in sad wyse
His eyes cast on hire, but in serious manner
Upon hir chiere he wolde hym ofte avyse,
Upon her demeanor he would often think,
Commendynge in his herte hir wommanhede,
Commending in his heart her womanly qualities,
And eek hir vertu, passynge any wight
And also her virtue, passing any person
Of so yong age, as wel in chiere as dede.
Of so young age, as well in manner as deed.
For thogh the peple have no greet insight
For though the people have no great insight
In vertu, he considered ful right
In virtue, he considered very carefully
Hir bountee, and disposed that he wolde
Her goodness, and decided that he would
Wedde hire oonly, if evere he wedde sholde.
Wed her only, if ever he should wed.
The day of weddyng cam, but no wight kan
The day of wedding came, but no person can
Telle what womman that it sholde be;
Tell what woman it should be;
For which merveille wondred many a man,
For which marvel wondered many a man,
And seyden, whan they were in privetee,
And said, when they were in private,
"Wol nat oure lord yet leve his vanytee?
"Will not our lord yet leave his vanity?
Wol he nat wedde? Allas! Allas, the while!
Will he not wed? Alas! Alas, the times!
Why wole he thus hymself and us bigile?"
Why will he thus himself and us deceive?"
But nathelees this markys hath doon make
But nevertheless this marquis has made
Of gemmes, set in gold and in asure,
Of gems, set in gold and in azure,
Brooches and rynges, for Grisildis sake;
Brooches and rings, for Griselda's sake;
And of hir clothyng took he the mesure
And of her clothing he took the measure
By a mayde lyk to hire stature,
By a maid like her (in) stature,
And eek of othere aornementes alle
And also of all other ornaments
That unto swich a weddyng sholde falle.
That unto such a wedding should be appropriate.
The time of undren of the same day
The time of mid-morning of the same day
Approcheth, that this weddyng sholde be,
Approaches, when this wedding should be,
And al the paleys put was in array,
And all the palace was put in proper order,
Bothe halle and chambres, ech in his degree;
Both hall and chambers, each in its turn;
Houses of office stuffed with plentee
Storage buildings stuffed with plenty,
Ther maystow seen, of deyntevous vitaille
There canst thou see, of delicious foods
That may be founde as fer as last Ytaille.
What can be found from as far as farthest Italy.
This roial markys, richely arrayed,
This royal marquis, richly arrayed,
Lordes and ladyes in his compaignye,
Lords and ladies in his company,
The whiche that to the feeste weren yprayed,
Who were invited to the feast,
And of his retenue the bachelrye,
And of his retinue the knights,
With many a soun of sondry melodye,
With many a sound of varied melody,
Unto the village of the which I tolde
Unto the village of which I told
In this array the righte wey han holde.
In this splendid array the direct route have held.
Grisilde of this, God woot, ful innocent,
Griselda of this, God knows, full ignorant,
That for hire shapen was al this array,
That for her was all this splendour prepared,
To fecchen water at a welle is went,
Has gone to fetch water at a well,
And cometh hoom as soone as ever she may;
And comes home as soon as ever she can;
For wel she hadde herd seyd that thilke day
For well she had heard said that same day
The markys sholde wedde, and if she myghte,
The marquis should wed, and if she could,
She wolde fayn han seyn som of that sighte.
She would be happy to have seen some of that sight.
She thoghte, "I wole with othere maydens stonde,
She thought, "I will stand with other maidens,
That been my felawes, in oure dore and se
Who are my fellows, in our door and see
The markysesse, and therfore wol I fonde
The marchioness, and therefore will I try
To doon at hoom, as soone as it may be,
To do at home, as soon as it can be,
The labour which that longeth unto me,
The chores that I must do,
And thanne I may at leyser hire biholde,
And then I may at leisure her behold,
If she this wey unto the castel holde."
If she takes this way to the castle."
And as she wolde over hir threshold gon,
And as she would over her threshold go,
The markys cam and gan hire for to calle;
The marquis came and called her;
And she set doun hir water pot anon,
And she set down her water pot quickly,
Biside the thresshfold, in an oxes stalle,
Beside the threshold, in an ox's stall,
And doun upon hir knes she gan to falle,
And down upon her knees she fell,
And with sad contenance kneleth stille,
And with sober countenance kneels without speaking,
Til she had herd what was the lordes wille.
Until she had heard what was the lord's will.
This thoghtful markys spak unto this mayde
This pensive marquis spoke unto this maid
Ful sobrely, and seyde in this manere:
Full soberly, and said in this manner:
"Where is youre fader, O Grisildis?" he sayde.
"Where is your father, O Griselda?" he said.
And she with reverence, in humble cheere,
And she with reverence, in humble manner,
Answerde, "Lord, he is al redy heere."
Answered, "Lord, he is right here."
And in she gooth withouten lenger lette,
And in she goes without longer delay,
And to the markys she hir fader fette.
And to the marquis she fetched her father.
He by the hand thanne took this olde man,
He by the hand then took this old man,
And seyde thus, whan he hym hadde asyde:
And said thus, when he had him aside:
"Janicula, I neither may ne kan
"Janicula, I neither may nor can
Lenger the plesance of myn herte hyde.
Longer hide the desire of my heart.
If that thou vouche sauf, what so bityde,
If thou agree, whatsoever may happen,
Thy doghter wol I take, er that I wende,
Thy daughter will I take, before I depart,
As for my wyf, unto hir lyves ende.
For my wife, until her life's end.
"Thou lovest me, I woot it wel certeyn,
"Thou lovest me, I know it well for certain,
And art my feithful lige man ybore,
And art my faithful liege man born,
And al that liketh me, I dar wel seyn
And all that pleases me, I dare well say
It liketh thee, and specially therfore
It pleases thee, and specially therefore
Tel me that poynt that I have seyd bifore,
Tell me of that question that I have stated previously,
If that thou wolt unto that purpos drawe,
If thou will agree with that proposal,
To take me as for thy sone-in-lawe."
To take me for thy son-in-law."
This sodeyn cas this man astonyed so
This sudden occurrence this man so astounded
That reed he wax; abayst and al quakynge
That he grew red; abashed and all trembling
He stood; unnethes seyde he wordes mo,
He stood; hardly said he any more words,
But oonly thus: "Lord," quod he, "my willynge
But only thus: "Lord," said he, "my desire
Is as ye wole, ne ayeynes youre likynge
Is as you wish, and against your pleasure
I wol no thyng, ye be my lord so deere;
I will do nothing, you are my lord so dear;
Right as yow lust, governeth this mateere."
Right as you please, govern this matter."
"Yet wol I," quod this markys softely,
"Yet I want," said this marquis softly,
"That in thy chambre I and thou and she
"That in thy chamber I and thou and she
Have a collacioun, and wostow why?
Have a discussion, and knowest thou why?
For I wol axe if it hire wille be
For I will ask if it be her will
To be my wyf and reule hire after me.
To be my wife and conduct herself as I decide.
And al this shal be doon in thy presence;
And all this shall be done in thy presence;
I wol noght speke out of thyn audience."
I will say nothing out of thy hearing."
And in the chambre, whil they were aboute
And in the chamber, while they were engaged in
Hir tretys, which as ye shal after heere,
Their negotiation, which you shall after hear,
The peple cam unto the hous withoute,
The people came unto outside the house,
And wondred hem in how honest manere
And wondered in what a virtuous manner
And tentifly she kepte hir fader deere.
And how attentively she cared for her dear father.
But outrely Grisildis wondre myghte,
But certainly Griselda might wonder,
For nevere erst ne saugh she swich a sighte.
For never before saw she such a sight.
No wonder is thogh that she were astoned
Though it is no wonder that she was astonished
To seen so greet a gest come in that place;
To see so great a guest come in that place;
She nevere was to swiche gestes woned,
She never was accustomed to such guests,
For which she looked with ful pale face.
For which she looked full pale in her face.
But shortly forth this matere for to chace,
But shortly forth this matter to pursue,
Thise arn the wordes that the markys sayde
These are the words that the marquis said
To this benigne, verray, feithful mayde:
To this benign, true, faithful maid:
"Grisilde," he seyde, "ye shal wel understonde
"Griselda," he said, "you shall well understand
It liketh to youre fader and to me
It is pleasing to your father and to me
That I yow wedde, and eek it may so stonde,
That I you wed, and also it may so stand,
As I suppose, ye wol that it so be.
As I suppose, that you desire that it so be.
But thise demandes axe I first," quod he,
But these questions ask I first," said he,
"That, sith it shal be doon in hastif wyse,
"That, since it shall be done in a hasty manner,
Wol ye assente, or elles yow avyse?
Will you assent, or else think it over?
"I seye this: be ye redy with good herte
"I say this: are you ready (to submit) with good heart
To al my lust, and that I frely may,
To all my desires, and that I freely may,
As me best thynketh, do yow laughe or smerte,
As seems best to me, make you laugh or feel pain,
And nevere ye to grucche it, nyght ne day?
And you never to grouch about it, at any time?
And eek whan I sey `ye,' ne sey nat `nay,'
And also when I say `yes,' say not `nay,'
Neither by word ne frownyng contenance?
Neither by word nor frowning countenance?
Swere this, and heere I swere oure alliance."
Swear this, and here I swear our alliance."
Wondrynge upon this word, quakynge for drede,
Wondering upon these words, trembling for fear,
She seyde, "Lord, undigne and unworthy
She said, "Lord, unsuitable and unworthy
Am I to thilke honour that ye me beede,
Am I of that same honor that you offer me,
But as ye wole youreself, right so wol I.
But as you desire yourself, right so desire I.
And heere I swere that nevere willyngly,
And here I swear that never willingly,
In werk ne thoght, I nyl yow disobeye,
In deed nor thought, will I disobey you,
For to be deed, though me were looth to deye."
Even to be dead, though I would hate to die."
"This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he.
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he.
And forth he gooth with a ful sobre cheere
And forth he goes with a full sober manner
Out at the dore, and after that cam she,
Out of the door, and after that came she,
And to the peple he seyde in this manere:
And to the people he said in this manner:
"This is my wyf," quod he, "that standeth heere.
"This is my wife," said he, "that stands here.
Honoureth hire and loveth hire, I preye,
Honor her and love her, I pray,
Whoso me loveth; ther is namoore to seye."
Whoever loves me; there is no more to say."
And for that no thyng of hir olde geere
And so that nothing of her old belongings
She sholde brynge into his hous, he bad
She should bring into his house, he ordered
That wommen sholde dispoillen hire right theere;
That women should undress her right there;
Of which thise ladyes were nat right glad
Of which these ladies were not very happy
To handle hir clothes, wherinne she was clad.
To handle her clothes, in which she was clad.
But nathelees, this mayde bright of hewe
But nevertheless, this maid bright of hue
Fro foot to heed they clothed han al newe.
From foot to head they have clothed all new.
Hir heris han they kembd, that lay untressed
Her hair have they combed, that lay unkempt
Ful rudely, and with hir fyngres smale
Very crudely, and with their elegant fingers
A corone on hire heed they han ydressed,
A crown on her head they have placed,
And sette hire ful of nowches grete and smale.
And set her garments full of jeweled ornaments of every sort.
Of hire array what sholde I make a tale?
Of her appearance why should I make a long tale?
Unnethe the peple hir knew for hire fairnesse
The hardly people knew her for her beauty
Whan she translated was in swich richesse.
When she was translated into such riches.
This markys hath hire spoused with a ryng
This marquis has espoused her with a ring
Broght for the same cause, and thanne hire sette
Brought for the same purpose, and then set her
Upon an hors, snow-whit and wel amblyng,
Upon a horse, snow-white and with a gentle pace,
And to his paleys, er he lenger lette,
And to his palace, before he longer delayed,
With joyful peple that hire ladde and mette,
With joyful people that led and met her,
Conveyed hire; and thus the day they spende
Conducted her; and thus the day they spend
In revel, til the sonne gan descende.
In revel, until the sun descended.
And shortly forth this tale for to chace,
And shortly forth this tale to pursue,
I seye that to this newe markysesse
I say that to this new marchioness
God hath swich favour sent hire of his grace
God has such favor sent her of his grace
That it ne semed nat by liklynesse
That it seemed not likely
That she was born and fed in rudenesse,
That she was born and fed in humble circumstances,
As in a cote or in an oxe-stalle,
In a peasant's hut or in an ox-stall,
But norissed in an emperoures halle.
But nurtured in an emperor's hall.
To every wight she woxen is so deere
To every person she is grown so dear
And worshipful that folk ther she was bore,
And worshipful that folk where she was born,
And from hire birthe knewe hire yeer by yeere,
And from her birth knew her year by year,
Unnethe trowed they -- but dorste han swore --
They hardly believed -- but dared have sworn --
That to Janicle, of which I spak bifore,
That to Janicle, of whom I spoke before,
She doghter were, for, as by conjecture,
She was daughter, for, by conjecture,
Hem thoughte she was another creature.
They thought she was another creature.
For though that evere vertuous was she,
For though that she was always virtuous,
She was encressed in swich excellence
She was increased in such excellence
Of thewes goode, yset in heigh bountee,
Of good characteristics, set in high goodness,
And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
So benigne and so digne of reverence,
So benign and so worthy of reverence,
And koude so the peples herte embrace,
And could so the people's heart embrace,
That ech hire lovede that looked on hir face.
That each who looked on her face loved her.
Noght oonly of Saluces in the toun
Not only in the town of Saluces
Publiced was the bountee of hir name,
Was made known the praise of her name,
But eek biside in many a regioun,
But also moreover in many a region,
If oon seide wel, another seyde the same;
If one said well, another said the same;
So spradde of hire heighe bountee the fame
So spread the fame of her high goodness
That men and wommen, as wel yonge as olde,
That men and women, as well young as old,
Goon to Saluce upon hire to biholde.
Go to Saluce to look upon her.
Thus Walter lowely -- nay, but roially --
Thus Walter lowly -- nay, but royally --
Wedded with fortunat honestetee,
Wedded with beneficial virtue,
In Goddes pees lyveth ful esily
In God's peace lives full easily
At hoom, and outward grace ynogh had he;
At home, and to all appearances he had sufficient happiness;
And for he saugh that under low degree
And because he saw that under low social rank
Was ofte vertu hid, the peple hym heelde
Was often virtue hid, the people considered him
A prudent man, and that is seyn ful seelde.
A prudent man, and that is seen full seldom.
Nat oonly this Grisildis thurgh hir wit
Not only this Griselda through her wit
Koude al the feet of wyfly hoomlinesse,
Knew all the skills of a housewife's duties,
But eek, whan that the cas required it,
But also, when the situation required it,
The commune profit koude she redresse.
The public good could she promote.
Ther nas discord, rancour, ne hevynesse
There was no discord, rancor, nor sadness
In al that land that she ne koude apese,
In all that land that she could not alleviate,
And wisely brynge hem alle in reste and ese.
And wisely bring them all in rest and ease.
Though that hire housbonde absent were anon,
Though her husband was absent at the time,
If gentil men or othere of hire contree
If noble men or others of her country
Were wrothe, she wolde bryngen hem aton;
Were wroth, she would bring them to agreement;
So wise and rype wordes hadde she,
Such wise and well considered words had she,
And juggementz of so greet equitee,
And judgments of such great justice,
That she from hevene sent was, as men wende,
That she was sent from heaven, as men supposed,
Peple to save and every wrong t'amende.
People to save and every wrong to amend.
Nat longe tyme after that this Grisild
Not long time after this Griselda
Was wedded, she a doghter hath ybore,
Was married, she has borne a daughter,
Al had hire levere have born a knave child;
Although she would rather have given birth to a male child;
Glad was this markys and the folk therfore,
Glad was this marquis and the folk for this,
For though a mayde child coome al bifore,
For though a maid child came all before,
She may unto a knave child atteyne
She may unto a male child attain
By liklihede, syn she nys nat bareyne.
By likelihood, since she is not barren.
Ther fil, as it bifalleth tymes mo,
There happened, as it befalls many times,
Whan that this child had souked but a throwe,
When this child had suckled but a short time,
This markys in his herte longeth so
This marquis in his heart longs so
To tempte his wyf, hir sadnesse for to knowe,
To test his wife, her constancy to know,
That he ne myghte out of his herte throwe
That he could not out of his heart throw
This merveillous desir his wyf t'assaye;
This strange desire to test his wife;
Nedelees, God woot, he thoghte hire for t'affraye.
Needless, God knows, he intended to frighten her.
He hadde assayed hire ynogh bifore,
He had tested her enough before,
And foond hire evere good; what neded it
And found her always good; why was it needed
Hire for to tempte, and alwey moore and moore,
To test her, and always more and more,
Though som men preise it for a subtil wit?
Though some men praise its ingenuity?
But as for me, I seye that yvele it sit
But as for me, I say that it ill befits one
To assaye a wyf whan that it is no nede,
To test a wife when there is no need,
And putten hire in angwyssh and in drede.
And put her in anguish and in dread.
For which this markys wroghte in this manere:
For which this marquis worked in this manner:
He cam allone a-nyght, ther as she lay,
He came alone at night, where she lay,
With stierne face and with ful trouble cheere,
With stern face and with a very troubled manner,
And seyde thus: "Grisilde," quod he, "that day
And said thus: "Griselda," said he, "that day
That I yow took out of youre povere array,
That I took you out of your impoverished situation,
And putte yow in estaat of heigh noblesse --
And put you in the condition of high nobility --
Ye have nat that forgeten, as I gesse?
You have not forgotten that, as I suppose?
"I seye, Grisilde, this present dignitee,
"I say, Griselda, this present high social position,
In which that I have put yow, as I trowe,
In which I have put you, as I believe,
Maketh yow nat foryetful for to be
Requires that you be not forgetful
That I yow took in povre estaat ful lowe,
That I took you in a poor, very humble condition,
For any wele ye moot youreselven knowe.
Despite any present prosperity you must know it yourself.
Taak heede of every word that y yow seye;
Take heed of every word that I say to you;
Ther is no wight that hereth it but we tweye.
There is no person that hears it but we two.
"Ye woot youreself wel how that ye cam heere
"You know well yourself how you came here
Into this hous, it is nat longe ago;
Into this house, it is not long ago;
And though to me that ye be lief and deere,
And though to me you are beloved and dear,
Unto my gentils ye be no thyng so.
Unto my nobles you are not at all so.
They seyn, to hem it is greet shame and wo
They say, to them it is great shame and woe
For to be subgetz and been in servage
To be subjects and be in servitude
To thee, that born art of a smal village.
To thee, that art born in a humble village.
"And namely sith thy doghter was ybore
"And especially since thy daughter was born
Thise wordes han they spoken, doutelees.
These words have they spoken, doubtless.
But I desire, as I have doon bifore,
But I desire, as I have done before,
To lyve my lyf with hem in reste and pees.
To live my life with them in rest and peace.
I may nat in this caas be recchelees;
I can not be imprudent in this case;
I moot doon with thy doghter for the beste,
I must do with thy daughter for the best,
Nat as I wolde, but as my peple leste.
Not as I would want, but as my people desire.
"And yet, God woot, this is ful looth to me;
"And yet, God knows, this is full hateful to me;
But nathelees withoute youre wityng
But nevertheless without your knowledge
I wol nat doon; but this wol I," quod he,
I will not do anything; but this I desire," said he,
"That ye to me assente as in this thyng.
"That you assent to me in this matter.
Shewe now youre pacience in youre werkyng,
Show now in your actions your patience,
That ye me highte and swore in youre village
That you promised me and swore in your village
That day that maked was oure mariage."
That day that our marriage was made."
Whan she had herd al this, she noght ameved
When she had heard all this, she changed not
Neither in word, or chiere, or contenaunce,
Neither in word, nor manner, nor countenance,
For, as it semed, she was nat agreved.
For, as it seemed, she was not aggrieved.
She seyde, "Lord, al lyth in youre plesaunce.
She said, "Lord, all is subject to your pleasure.
My child and I, with hertely obeisaunce,
My child and I, with heart-felt obedience,
Been youres al, and ye mowe save or spille
Are entirely yours, and you may save or kill
Youre owene thyng; werketh after youre wille.
Your own thing; do as you will.
"Ther may no thyng, God so my soule save,
"There can nothing, as God my soul may save,
Liken to yow that may displese me;
Please you that may displease me;
Ne I desire no thyng for to have,
Nor do I desire to have anything,
Ne drede for to leese, save oonly yee.
Nor dread to lose, save only you.
This wyl is in myn herte, and ay shal be;
This will is in my heart, and ever shall be;
No lengthe of tyme or deeth may this deface,
No length of time or death can obliterate this,
Ne chaunge my corage to another place."
Nor change my heart to another place."
Glad was this markys of hire answeryng,
Glad was this marquis of her answer,
But yet he feyned as he were nat so;
But yet he feigned as if he were not so;
Al drery was his cheere and his lookyng,
All sorrowful was his manner and his look,
Whan that he sholde out of the chambre go.
When he had to go out of the chamber.
Soone after this, a furlong wey or two,
Soon after this, in a few minutes,
He prively hath toold al his entente
He privately has told all his plan
Unto a man, and to his wyf hym sente.
Unto a man, and sent him to his wife.
A maner sergeant was this privee man,
A sort of sergeant (policeman) was this confidential servant,
The which that feithful ofte he founden hadde
Whom he had often found faithful
In thynges grete, and eek swich folk wel kan
In important matters, and also such folk well can
Doon execucioun in thynges badde.
Carry out their orders in evil matters.
The lord knew wel that he hym loved and dradde;
The lord knew well that he loved and dreaded him;
And whan this sergeant wiste his lordes wille,
And when this sergeant knew his lord's will,
Into the chambre he stalked hym ful stille.
Into the chamber he stalked very quietly.
"Madame," he seyde, "ye moote foryeve it me,
"Madame," he said, "you must forgive it me,
Though I do thyng to which I am constreyned.
Though I do a thing to which I am constrained.
Ye been so wys that ful wel knowe ye
You are so wise that full well you know
That lordes heestes mowe nat been yfeyned;
That lords' commands may not be evaded (by feigning);
They mowe wel been biwailled or compleyned,
They may well be bewailed or complained of,
But men moote nede unto hire lust obeye,
But men must by necessity unto their desires obey,
And so wol I; ther is namoore to seye.
And so will I; there is no more to say.
"This child I am comanded for to take" --
"This child I am commanded to take" --
And spak namoore, but out the child he hente
And spoke no more, but out the child he seized
Despitously, and gan a cheere make
Mercilessly, and made a face
As though he wolde han slayn it er he wente.
As if he would have slain it before he went.
Grisildis moot al suffre and al consente,
Griselda must suffer all and consent to all,
And as a lamb she sitteth meke and stille,
And as a lamb she sits meek and still,
And leet this crueel sergeant doon his wille.
And let this cruel sergeant do his will.
Suspecious was the diffame of this man,
Suspicious was the bad reputation of this man,
Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
Suspect the tyme in which he this bigan.
Suspect the time in which he this began.
Allas! Hir doghter that she loved so,
Alas! Her daughter that she loved so,
She wende he wolde han slawen it right tho.
She thought he would have slain it right then.
But nathelees she neither weep ne syked,
But nevertheless she neither wept nor sighed,
Conformynge hire to that the markys lyked.
Conforming herself to what the marquis pleased.
But atte laste to speken she bigan,
But at the last she began to speak,
And mekely she to the sergeant preyde,
And meekly she to the sergeant prayed,
So as he was a worthy gentil man,
As he was a worthy gentle man,
That she moste kisse hire child er that it deyde.
That she might kiss her child before it died.
And in hir barm this litel child she leyde
And in her lap this little child she laid
With ful sad face, and gan the child to blisse,
With full sad face, and blessed the child,
And lulled it, and after gan it kisse.
And lulled it, and afterward kissed it.
And thus she seyde in hire benigne voys,
And thus she said in her benign voice,
"Fareweel my child! I shal thee nevere see.
"Farewell my child! I shall thee never see.
But sith I thee have marked with the croys
But since I have marked thee with the cross
Of thilke Fader -- blessed moote he be! --
Of that same Father -- blessed may he be! --
That for us deyde upon a croys of tree,
That for us died upon a cross of wood,
Thy soule, litel child, I hym bitake,
Thy soul, little child, I entrust to him,
For this nyght shaltow dyen for my sake."
For this night shalt thou die for my sake."
I trowe that to a norice in this cas
I believe that to a nurse in this case
It had been hard this reuthe for to se;
It would have been hard this pitiful situation to see;
Wel myghte a mooder thanne han cryd "allas!"
Well might a mother then have cried "alas!"
But nathelees so sad stidefast was she
But nevertheless so firmly steadfast was she
That she endured al adversitee,
That she endured all adversity,
And to the sergeant mekely she sayde,
And to the sergeant meekly she said,
"Have heer agayn youre litel yonge mayde.
"Have here again your little young maid.
"Gooth now," quod she, "and dooth my lordes heeste;
"Go now," said she, "and do my lord's command;
But o thyng wol I prey yow of youre grace,
But one thing will I pray you of your grace,
That, but my lord forbad yow, atte leeste
That, unless my lord forbad you, at the least
Burieth this litel body in som place
Bury this little body in some place
That beestes ne no briddes it torace."
That no beasts nor birds tear it to pieces."
But he no word wol to that purpos seye,
But he no word will say to that proposal,
But took the child and wente upon his weye.
But took the child and went upon his way.
This sergeant cam unto his lord ageyn,
This sergeant came unto his lord again,
And of Grisildis wordes and hire cheere
And of Griselda's words and her manner
He tolde hym point for point, in short and pleyn,
He told him in detail, in short and plain (words),
And hym presenteth with his doghter deere.
And presents him with his daughter dear.
Somwhat this lord hadde routhe in his manere,
Somewhat this lord had pity in his manner,
But nathelees his purpos heeld he stille,
But nevertheless his purpose held he still,
As lordes doon, whan they wol han hir wille;
As lords do, when they will have their will;
And bad this sergeant that he pryvely
And commanded this sergeant that he secretly
Sholde this child softe wynde and wrappe,
Should this child softly wind and wrap (in a blanket),
With alle circumstances tendrely,
With every care tenderly,
And carie it in a cofre or in a lappe;
And carry it in a box or in a folded cloth;
But, upon peyne his heed of for to swappe,
But, upon pain of having his head cut off,
That no man sholde knowe of his entente,
No man should know of his intention,
Ne whenne he cam, ne whider that he wente;
Nor whence he came, nor whither he went;
But at Boloigne to his suster deere,
But at Bologna to his sister dear,
That thilke tyme of Panik was countesse,
Who at that very time was countess of Panik,
He sholde it take and shewe hire this mateere,
He should take it and explain to her this matter,
Bisekynge hire to doon hire bisynesse
Beseeching her to do her best
This child to fostre in alle gentillesse;
This child to nurture in all noble manners;
And whos child that it was he bad hire hyde
And whose child that it was he commanded her to hide
From every wight, for oght that may bityde.
From every person, for anything that may happen.
The sergeant gooth, and hath fulfild this thyng;
The sergeant goes, and has fulfilled this order;
But to this markys now retourne we.
But to this marquis we now return.
For now gooth he ful faste ymaginyng
For now he goes very intently considering
If by his wyves cheere he myghte se,
If by his wife's appearance he might see,
Or by hire word aperceyve, that she
Or by her word perceive, if she
Were chaunged; but he nevere hire koude fynde
Were changed; but he never could find her
But evere in oon ylike sad and kynde.
Anything but always the same, alike steadfast and kind.
As glad, as humble, as bisy in servyse,
As glad, as humble, as diligent in service,
And eek in love, as she was wont to be,
And also in love, as she was accustomed to be,
Was she to hym in every maner wyse;
Was she to him in every sort of way;
Ne of hir doghter noght a word spak she.
Nor of her daughter not a word spoke she.
Noon accident, for noon adversitee,
No external sign, for any adversity,
Was seyn in hire, ne nevere hir doghter name
Was seen in her, and never her daughter's name
Ne nempned she, in ernest nor in game.
Mentioned she, in earnest nor in jest (in any way).
In this estaat ther passed been foure yeer
In this condition there are passed four years
Er she with childe was, but, as God wolde,
Before she was with child, but, as God would,
A knave child she bar by this Walter,
A male child she bore by this Walter,
Ful gracious and fair for to biholde.
Very gracious and beautiful in appearance.
And whan that folk it to his fader tolde,
And when folk told it to his father,
Nat oonly he but al his contree merye
Not only he but all his country merry
Was for this child, and God they thanke and herye.
Was for this child, and God they thank and praise.
Whan it was two yeer old, and fro the brest
When it was two years old, and from the breast
Departed of his norice, on a day
Of his nurse weaned, on one day
This markys caughte yet another lest
This marquis caught yet another desire
To tempte his wyf yet ofter, if he may.
To test his wife yet again, if he can.
O nedelees was she tempted in assay!
O needless was she put to the test!
But wedded men ne knowe no mesure,
But wedded men know no moderation,
Whan that they fynde a pacient creature.
When they find a patient creature.
"Wyf," quod this markys, "ye han herd er this
"Wife," said this marquis, "you have heard before this
My peple sikly berth oure mariage;
My people are unhappy with our marriage;
And namely sith my sone yboren is,
And especially since my son is born,
Now is it worse than evere in al oure age.
Now is it worse than ever in all our lives.
The murmur sleeth myn herte and my corage,
The grumbling slays my heart and my feelings,
For to myne eres comth the voys so smerte
For to my ears comes the voice so sharply
That it wel ny destroyed hath myn herte.
That it well nigh has destroyed my heart.
"Now sey they thus: `Whan Walter is agon,
"Now say they thus: `When Walter is gone,
Thanne shal the blood of Janicle succede
Then shall the blood of Janicle succeed
And been oure lord, for oother have we noon.'
And be our lord, for we have no other.'
Swiche wordes seith my peple, out of drede.
Such words say my people, no doubt.
Wel oughte I of swich murmur taken heede,
Well ought I of such grumbling take heed,
For certeinly I drede swich sentence,
For certainly I dread such opinion,
Though they nat pleyn speke in myn audience.
Though they speak not plainly in my hearing.
"I wolde lyve in pees, if that I myghte;
"I would live in peace, if I could;
Wherfore I am disposed outrely,
Therefore I am firmly resolved,
As I his suster servede by nyghte,
As I dealt with his sister by night,
Right so thenke I to serve hym pryvely.
Right so I intend to deal with him secretly.
This warne I yow, that ye nat sodeynly
This I warn you, so that you not suddenly
Out of youreself for no wo sholde outreye;
For any woe should break out in a passion;
Beth pacient, and therof I yow preye."
Be patient, and for that I pray you."
"I have," quod she, "seyd thus, and evere shal:
"I have," said she, "said thus, and ever shall:
I wol no thyng, ne nyl no thyng, certayn,
I want nothing, nor will not want any thing, certainly,
But as yow list. Naught greveth me at al,
But as you desire. It does not grieve me at all,
Though that my doughter and my sone be slayn --
Though my daughter and my son be slain --
At youre comandement, this is to sayn.
At your commandment, this is to say.
I have noght had no part of children tweyne
I have not had any part of children two
But first siknesse, and after, wo and peyne.
But first sickness, and after, woe and pain.
"Ye been oure lord; dooth with youre owene thyng
"You are our lord; do with your own thing
Right as yow list; axeth no reed at me.
Right as you desire; ask no advice from me.
For as I lefte at hoom al my clothyng,
For as I left at home all my clothing,
Whan I first cam to yow, right so," quod she,
When I first came to you, right so," said she,
"Lefte I my wyl and al my libertee,
"Left I my will and all my liberty,
And took youre clothyng; wherfore I yow preye,
And took your clothing; wherefore I you pray,
Dooth youre plesaunce; I wol youre lust obeye.
Do your pleasure; I will obey your desire.
"And certes, if I hadde prescience
"And certainly, if I had foreknowledge
Youre wyl to knowe, er ye youre lust me tolde,
To know your will, before you told me your desire,
I wolde it doon withouten necligence;
I would do it without negligence;
But now I woot youre lust, and what ye wolde,
But now I know your desire, and what you want,
Al youre plesance ferme and stable I holde;
All your pleasure (whatever you wish) firm and stable I hold;
For wiste I that my deeth wolde do yow ese,
For if I knew that my death would do you ease,
Right gladly wolde I dyen, yow to plese.
Right gladly would I die, to please you.
"Deth may noght make no comparisoun
"Death can not make any comparison (is nothing compared)
Unto youre love." And whan this markys say
Unto your love." And when this marquis saw
The constance of his wyf, he caste adoun
The constancy of his wife, he cast down
His eyen two, and wondreth that she may
His eyes two, and wonders that she can
In pacience suffre al this array;
In patience suffer all this treatment;
And forth he goth with drery contenance,
And forth he goes with sorrowful countenance,
But to his herte it was ful greet plesance.
But to his heart it was full great pleasure.
This ugly sergeant, in the same wyse
This ugly sergeant, in the same manner
That he hire doghter caughte, right so he --
That he her daughter seized, right so he --
Or worse, if men worse kan devyse --
Or worse, if one can worse imagine --
Hath hent hire sone, that ful was of beautee.
Has seized her son, that was full of beauty.
And evere in oon so pacient was she
And continually so patient was she
That she no chiere maade of hevynesse,
That she made no appearance of sadness,
But kiste hir sone, and after gan it blesse;
But kissed her son, and afterwards it blessed;
Save this, she preyede hym that, if he myghte,
Save this, she prayed him that, if he could,
Hir litel sone he wolde in erthe grave
Her little son he would bury in earth
His tendre lymes, delicaat to sighte,
His tender limbs, pleasing in appearance,
Fro foweles and fro beestes for to save.
From birds and from beasts to save.
But she noon answere of hym myghte have.
But she no answer of him might have.
He wente his wey, as hym no thyng ne roghte,
He went his way, as if he cared nothing about it,
But to Boloigne he tendrely it broghte.
But to Bologna he tenderly brought it.
This markys wondred, evere lenger the moore,
This marquis wondered, more and more,
Upon hir pacience, and if that he
Upon her patience, and if he
Ne hadde soothly knowen therbifoore
Had not truly known before this
That parfitly hir children loved she,
That she perfectly loved her children,
He wolde have wend that of som subtiltee,
He would have supposed that by some trickery,
And of malice, or for crueel corage,
And out of malice, or for hard heart,
That she hadde suffred this with sad visage.
That she had suffered this with calm manner.
But wel he knew that next hymself, certayn,
But well he knew that next to himself, certainly,
She loved hir children best in every wyse.
She loved her children best in every way.
But now of wommen wolde I axen fayn
But now I would like to ask of women
If thise assayes myghte nat suffise?
If these tests might not suffice?
What koude a sturdy housbonde moore devyse
What could a cruel husband more devise
To preeve hir wyfhod and hir stedefastnesse,
To test her wifehood and her steadfastness,
And he continuynge evere in sturdinesse?
And he continuing ever in cruelty?
But ther been folk of swich condicion
But there are folk of such disposition
That whan they have a certein purpos take,
That when they have a certain purpose taken,
They kan nat stynte of hire entencion,
They can not refrain from their intention,
But, right as they were bounden to that stake,
But, right as if they were bound to that stake,
They wol nat of that firste purpos slake.
They will not from that original plan desist.
Right so this markys fulliche hath purposed
Right so this marquis has firmly decided
To tempte his wyf as he was first disposed.
To test his wife as he was first disposed.
He waiteth if by word or contenance
He watches to see if by word or countenance
That she to hym was changed of corage,
That she to him was changed in heart,
But nevere koude he fynde variance.
But never could he find variation.
She was ay oon in herte and in visage,
She was always the same in heart and in visage,
And ay the forther that she was in age,
And ever the further that she was in age,
The moore trewe, if that it were possible,
The more true, if it were possible,
She was to hym in love, and moore penyble.
She was to him in love, and more attentive.
For which it semed thus: that of hem two
For which it seemed thus: that of them two
Ther nas but o wyl, for as Walter leste,
There was but one will, for as Walter desired,
The same lust was hire plesance also.
The same desire was her pleasure also.
And, God be thanked, al fil for the beste.
And, God be thanked, all fell for the best.
She shewed wel, for no worldly unreste
She proved good; for no worldly discomfort
A wyf, as of hirself, nothing ne sholde
A wife, concerning herself, nothing should
Wille in effect, but as hir housbonde wolde.
Desire in fact, except what her husband would want.
The sclaundre of Walter ofte and wyde spradde,
The ill fame of Walter spread often and wide,
That of a crueel herte he wikkedly,
That of a cruel heart he wickedly,
For he a povre womman wedded hadde,
Because he had wedded a poor woman,
Hath mordred bothe his children prively.
Has murdered both his children secretly.
Swich murmur was among hem comunly.
Such grumbling was among them unanimously.
No wonder is, for to the peples ere
No wonder is, for to the people's ear
Ther cam no word but that they mordred were.
There came no word but that they were murdered.
For which, where as his peple therbifore
For which, whereas his people before this
Hadde loved hym wel, the sclaundre of his diffame
Had loved him well, the disgrace of his bad reputation
Made hem that they hym hatede therfore.
Made them so that they hated him for this.
To been a mordrere is an hateful name;
To be a murderer is (to have) a hateful reputation;
But nathelees, for ernest ne for game,
But nevertheless, not for any reason,
He of his crueel purpos nolde stente;
Would he of his cruel purpose desist;
To tempte his wyf was set al his entente.
To test his wife was set all his intention.
Whan that his doghter twelve yeer was of age,
When his daughter was twelve years of age,
He to the court of Rome, in subtil wyse
He to the court of Rome, (which was) in a cunning manner
Enformed of his wyl, sente his message,
Informed of his real purpose, sent his messenger,
Comaundynge hem swiche bulles to devyse
Commanding them such papal bulls to devise
As to his crueel purpos may suffyse --
As to his cruel purpose may suffice --
How that the pope, as for his peples reste,
How the pope, to restore tranquility for his people,
Bad hym to wedde another, if hym leste.
Commanded him to wed another, if he pleased.
I seye, he bad they sholde countrefete
I say, he commanded they should counterfeit
The popes bulles, makynge mencion
The pope's bulls, making mention
That he hath leve his firste wyf to lete,
That he has permission to leave his first wife,
As by the popes dispensacion,
As by the pope's dispensation,
To stynte rancour and dissencion
To stint rancor and dissension
Bitwixe his peple and hym; thus seyde the bulle,
Between his people and him; thus said the bull,
The which they han publiced atte fulle.
Which they have published widely.
The rude peple, as it no wonder is,
The ignorant people, as it no wonder is,
Wenden ful wel that it hadde be right so;
Supposed full well that it had been right so;
But whan thise tidynges came to Grisildis,
But when these tidings came to Griselda,
I deeme that hire herte was ful wo.
I believe that her heart was very woeful.
But she, ylike sad for everemo,
But she, continuously steadfast for evermore,
Disposed was, this humble creature,
Disposed was, this humble creature,
The adversitee of Fortune al t'endure,
To endure all the adversity of Fortune,
Abidynge evere his lust and his plesance,
Enduring ever his desire and his pleasure,
To whom that she was yeven herte and al,
To whom she was given, heart and all,
As to hire verray worldly suffisance.
As her true worldly source of satisfaction.
But shortly if this storie I tellen shal,
But shortly if this story I tell shall,
This markys writen hath in special
This marquis written has in detail
A lettre, in which he sheweth his entente,
A letter, in which he reveals his intention,
And secreely he to Boloigne it sente.
And secretly he sent it to Bologna.
To the Erl of Panyk, which that hadde tho
To the Earl of Panyk, who had then
Wedded his suster, preyde he specially
Wedded his sister, prayed he specifically
To bryngen hoom agayn his children two
To bring home again his two children
In honurable estaat al openly.
In a noble public display.
But o thyng he hym preyede outrely,
But one thing he him prayed earnestly,
That he to no wight, though men wolde enquere,
That he to no one, though men would inquire,
Sholde nat telle whos children that they were,
Should tell whose children they were,
But seye the mayden sholde ywedded be
But say the maiden should wedded be
Unto the Markys of Saluce anon.
Unto the Marquis of Saluce immediately.
And as this erl was preyed, so dide he;
And as this earl was asked, so did he;
For at day set he on his wey is goon
For at the set day he on his way is gone
Toward Saluce, and lordes many oon
Toward Saluce, and lords many a one
In riche array, this mayden for to gyde,
In rich array, this maiden to guide,
Hir yonge brother ridynge hire bisyde.
Her young brother riding beside her.
Arrayed was toward hir mariage
Adorned was in preparation for her marriage
This fresshe mayde, ful of gemmes cleere;
This lovely maid, (her clothing) full of bright gems;
Hir brother, which that seven yeer was of age,
Her brother, who was seven years of age,

Arrayed eek ful fressh in his manere.
Adorned also full handsomely in his manner.
And thus in greet noblesse and with glad cheere,
And thus in great nobility and with a glad manner,
Toward Saluces shapynge hir journey,
Toward Saluces directing their journey,
Fro day to day they ryden in hir wey.
From day to day they ride on their way.
Among al this, after his wikke usage,
Meanwhile, in accord with his wicked usage,
This markys, yet his wyf to tempte moore
This marquis, yet his wife to test more
To the outtreste preeve of hir corage,
To the utmost test of her heart,
Fully to han experience and loore
Fully to have experience and knowledge
If that she were as stidefast as bifoore,
If she were as steadfast as before,
He on a day in open audience
He on a certain day in the hearing of all
Ful boistously hath seyd hire this sentence:
Full rudely has said to her this speech:
"Certes, Grisilde, I hadde ynogh plesance
"Certainly, Griselda, I had enough pleasure
To han yow to my wyf for youre goodnesse,
To have you as my wife for your goodness,
As for youre trouthe and for youre obeisance,
As for your truth and for your obedience
Noght for youre lynage, ne for youre richesse;
Not for your lineage, nor for your riches;
But now knowe I in verray soothfastnesse
But now know I in true certainty
That in greet lordshipe, if I wel avyse,
That in great lordship, if I judge rightly,
Ther is greet servitute in sondry wyse.
There is great servitude in various ways.
"I may nat doon as every plowman may.
"I can not do as every plowman may.
My peple me constreyneth for to take
My people constrain me to take
Another wyf, and crien day by day;
Another wife, and complain day by day;
And eek the pope, rancour for to slake,
And also the pope, to quench rancor,
Consenteth it -- that dar I undertake --
Consents to it -- that dare I assert --
And trewely thus muche I wol yow seye:
And truly thus much I will say to you:
My newe wyf is comynge by the weye.
My new wife is coming by the way.
"Be strong of herte, and voyde anon hir place;
"Be strong of heart, and vacate her place immediately;
And thilke dowere that ye broghten me,
And that dowry that you brought me,
Taak it agayn; I graunte it of my grace.
Take it back; I grant it of my grace.
Retourneth to youre fadres hous," quod he;
Return to your father's house," said he;
"No man may alwey han prosperitee.
"No one can always have prosperity.
With evene herte I rede yow t'endure
With tranquil heart I advise you to endure
The strook of Fortune or of aventure."
The stroke of Fortune or of chance."
And she agayn answerde in pacience:
And she in reply answered in patience:
"My lord," quod she, "I woot, and wiste alway,
"My lord," said she, "I know, and knew always,
How that bitwixen youre magnificence
How between your magnificence
And my poverte no wight kan ne may
And my poverty no person can nor may
Maken comparison; it is no nay.
Make comparison; it cannot be denied.
I ne heeld me nevere digne in no manere
I considered myself never worthy in any way
To be youre wyf, no, ne youre chamberere.
To be your wife, no, nor your chambermaid.
"And in this hous, ther ye me lady maade --
"And in this house, where you made me the lady --
The heighe God take I for my witnesse,
The high God I take for my witness,
And also wysly he my soule glaade --
And as surely as he my soul may gladden --
I nevere heeld me lady ne mistresse,
I never considered myself lady nor mistress,
But humble servant to youre worthynesse,
But humble servant to your worthiness,
And evere shal, whil that my lyf may dure,
And ever shall, while my life may endure,
Aboven every worldly creature.
Above every worldly creature.
"That ye so longe of youre benignitee
"That you so long of your benignity
Han holden me in honour and nobleye,
Have maintained me in honor and nobility,
Where as I was noght worthy for to bee,
Where I was not worthy to be,
That thonke I God and yow, to whom I preye
For that I thank you and God, to Whom I pray
Foryelde it yow; ther is namoore to seye.
To reward you for it; there is no more to say.
Unto my fader gladly wol I wende,
Unto my father gladly will I go,
And with hym dwelle unto my lyves ende.
And with him dwell unto my life's end.
"Ther I was fostred of a child ful smal,
"Where I was fostered as a child full small,
Til I be deed my lyf ther wol I lede,
Until I be dead I will lead my life there,
A wydwe clene in body, herte, and al.
A widow clean in body, heart, and all.
For sith I yaf to yow my maydenhede,
For since I gave to you my maidenhead,
And am youre trewe wyf, it is no drede,
And am your true wife, there is no doubt,
God shilde swich a lordes wyf to take
God forbid such a lord's wife to take
Another man to housbonde or to make!
Another man as husband or as mate!
"And of youre newe wyf God of his grace
"And of your new wife God of his grace
So graunte yow wele and prosperitee!
Grant you happiness and prosperity!
For I wol gladly yelden hire my place,
For I will gladly yield her my place,
In which that I was blisful wont to bee.
In which I was accustomed to be blissful.
For sith it liketh yow, my lord," quod shee,
For since it pleases you, my lord," said she,
"That whilom weren al myn hertes reste,
"Who once was all my heart's peace,
That I shal goon, I wol goon whan yow leste.
That I shall go, I will go when you please.
"But ther as ye me profre swich dowaire
"But inasmuch as you offer me such dowry
As I first broghte, it is wel in my mynde
As I first brought, it is well in my mind
It were my wrecched clothes, nothyng faire,
It was my wretched clothing, in no way fair,
The whiche to me were hard now for to fynde.
Which to me were hard to find now.
O goode God! How gentil and how kynde
O good God! How gentle and how kind
Ye semed by youre speche and youre visage
You seemed by your speech and your visage
The day that maked was oure mariage!
The day that our marriage was made!
"But sooth is seyd -- algate I fynde it trewe,
"But sooth is said -- always I find it true,
For in effect it preeved is on me --
For in fact it is proven by me --
Love is noght oold as whan that it is newe.
When love is old it is not the same as when it was new.
But certes, lord, for noon adversitee,
But certainly, lord, for no adversity,
To dyen in the cas, it shal nat bee
Even if I were to die miserably, it shall not be
That evere in word or werk I shal repente
That ever in word or deed I shall repent
That I yow yaf myn herte in hool entente.
That I gave you my heart whole heartedly.
"My lord, ye woot that in my fadres place
"My lord, you know that in my father's place
Ye dide me streepe out of my povre weede,
You had me stripped out of my poor clothing,
And richely me cladden, of youre grace.
And had me richly clad, by your grace.
To yow broghte I noght elles, out of drede,
To you I brought nothing else, beyond doubt,
But feith, and nakednesse, and maydenhede;
But faith, and nakedness, and maidenhead;
And heere agayn your clothyng I restoore,
And here in return your clothing I restore,
And eek your weddyng ryng, for everemore.
And also your wedding ring, for evermore.
"The remenant of youre jueles redy be
"The remnant of your jewels ready are
Inwith youre chambre, dar I saufly sayn.
Within your chamber, dare I confidently say.
Naked out of my fadres hous," quod she,
Naked out of my father's house," said she,
"I cam, and naked moot I turne agayn.
"I came, and naked must I return.
Al youre plesance wol I folwen fayn;
All your pleasure will I eagerly follow;
But yet I hope it be nat youre entente
But yet I hope it be not your intention
That I smoklees out of youre paleys wente.
That I should go without a smock out of your palace.
"Ye koude nat doon so dishonest a thyng,
"You could not do so shameful a thing,
That thilke wombe in which youre children leye
That that same womb in which your children lay
Sholde biforn the peple, in my walkyng,
Should before the people, in my walking,
Be seyn al bare; wherfore I yow preye,
Be seen all bare; therefore I you pray,
Lat me nat lyk a worm go by the weye.
Let me not like a worm go by the way.
Remembre yow, myn owene lord so deere,
Remember, my own lord so dear,
I was youre wyf, though I unworthy weere.
I was your wife, though I unworthy were.
"Wherfore, in gerdon of my maydenhede,
"Therefore, in recompense for my maidenhead,
Which that I broghte, and noght agayn I bere,
Which I brought, and nothing I bear back,
As voucheth sauf to yeve me, to my meede,
Condescend to give me, as my recompense,
But swich a smok as I was wont to were,
Only such a smock as I was accustomed to wear,
That I therwith may wrye the wombe of here
That I with it may cover the womb of her
That was youre wyf. And heer take I my leeve
Who was your wife. And here take I my leave
Of yow, myn owene lord, lest I yow greve."
Of you, my own lord, lest I you grieve."
"The smok," quod he, "that thou hast on thy bak,
"The smock," said he, "that thou hast on thy back,
Lat it be stille, and bere it forth with thee."
Let it be (there) still, and bear it forth with thee."
But wel unnethes thilke word he spak,
But scarcely that same word he spoke,
But wente his wey, for routhe and for pitee.
But went his way, for grief and for pity.
Biforn the folk hirselven strepeth she,
Before the folk she strips herself,
And in hir smok, with heed and foot al bare,
And in her smock, with head and foot all bare,
Toward hir fadre hous forth is she fare.
Toward her father's house forth is she gone.
The folk hire folwe, wepynge in hir weye,
The folk follow her, weeping on their way,
And Fortune ay they cursen as they goon;
And Fortune ever they curse as they go;
But she fro wepyng kepte hire eyen dreye,
But she from weeping kept her eyes dry,
Ne in this tyme word ne spak she noon.
And in this time no word she spoke.
Hir fader, that this tidynge herde anoon,
Her father, who heard this news straightway,
Curseth the day and tyme that Nature
Curses the day and time that Nature
Shoop hym to been a lyves creature.
Shaped him to be a living creature.
For out of doute this olde poure man
For doubtless this old poor man
Was evere in suspect of hir mariage;
Was ever in suspicion of her marriage;
For evere he demed, sith that it bigan,
For ever he believed, since it began,
That whan the lord fulfild hadde his corage,
That when the lord had fulfilled his desires,
Hym wolde thynke it were a disparage
He would think it was a degradation
To his estaat so lowe for t'alighte,
To his rank so low to stoop,
And voyden hire as soone as ever he myghte.
And get rid of her as soon as ever he could.
Agayns his doghter hastily goth he,
To meet his daughter hastily goes he,
For he by noyse of folk knew hire comynge,
For he by noise of folk knew her coming,
And with hire olde coote, as it myghte be
And with her old coat, insofar as it could
He covered hire, ful sorwefully wepynge.
He covered her, full sorrowfully weeping.
But on hire body myghte he it nat brynge,
But on her body he could not bring it,
For rude was the clooth, and moore of age
For coarse was the cloth, and more of age
By dayes fele than at hire mariage.
By many days than at her marriage.
Thus with hire fader for a certeyn space
Thus with her father for a certain space of time
Dwelleth this flour of wyfly pacience,
Dwells this flower of womanly patience,
That neither by hire wordes ne hire face,
That neither by her words nor her face,
Biforn the folk, ne eek in hire absence,
Before the folk, nor also in their absence,
Ne shewed she that hire was doon offence;
She showed that to her was done offence;
Ne of hire heighe estaat no remembraunce
Nor of her high estate no remembrance
Ne hadde she, as by hire contenaunce.
Had she, according to her countenance.
No wonder is, for in hire grete estaat
No wonder is, for in her great estate
Hire goost was evere in pleyn humylitee;
Her spirit was ever in full humility;
No tendre mouth, noon herte delicaat,
No tender mouth, no self-indulgent feelings,
No pompe, no semblant of roialtee,
No pomp, nor outward appearance of royalty,
But ful of pacient benyngnytee,
But full of patient goodness,
Discreet and pridelees, ay honurable,
Discreet and without pride, ever honorable,
And to hire housbonde evere meke and stable.
And to her husband ever meek and stable.
Men speke of Job, and moost for his humblesse,
Men speak of Job, and mostly for his humility,
As clerkes, whan hem list, konne wel endite,
As clerks, when they want, know well how to write,
Namely of men, but as in soothfastnesse,
Especially of men, but in truth,
Though clerkes preise wommen but a lite,
Though clerks praise women but a little,
Ther kan no man in humblesse hym acquite
There can no man in humility acquit himself
As womman kan, ne kan been half so trewe
As woman can, nor can be half so true
As wommen been, but it be falle of newe.
As women are, unless it happened recently.
Fro Boloigne is this Erl of Panyk come,
From Bologna is this Earl of Panyk come,
Of which the fame up sprang to moore and lesse,
Of which the news up sprang to high ranks and low,
And to the peples eres, alle and some,
And to the people's ears, one and all,
Was kouth eek that a newe markysesse
Was made known also that a new marchioness
He with hym broghte, in swich pompe and richesse
He brought with him, in such pomp and riches
That nevere was ther seyn with mannes ye
That never was there seen with man's eye
So noble array in al West Lumbardye.
Such a noble array in all West Lombardy.
The markys, which that shoop and knew al this,
The marquis, who arranged and knew all this,
Er that this erl was come, sente his message
Before this earl was come, sent his messenger
For thilke sely povre Grisildis;
For that same innocent poor Griselda;
And she with humble herte and glad visage,
And she with humble heart and glad visage,
Nat with no swollen thoght in hire corage,
Not with any proud thought in her heart,
Cam at his heste, and on hire knees hire sette,
Came at his command, and on her knees set herself,
And reverently and wisely she hym grette.
And reverently and wisely she greeted him.
"Grisilde," quod he, "my wyl is outrely
"Griselda," said he, "my will is completely
This mayden, that shal wedded been to me,
That this maiden, who shall be wedded to me,
Received be to-morwe as roially
Be received to-morrow as royally
As it possible is in myn hous to be,
As it is possible in my house to be,
And eek that every wight in his degree
And also that every person, according to his rank
Have his estaat, in sittyng and servyse
Have his due respect, in seating and service
And heigh plesaunce, as I kan best devyse.
And great pleasure, as I can best arrange.
"I have no wommen suffisaunt, certayn,
"I have no women capable, certainly,
The chambres for t'arraye in ordinaunce
The chambers to put in order
After my lust, and therfore wolde I fayn
According to my wishes, and therefore I would like
That thyn were al swich manere governaunce.
That thine be the supervision of all this business.
Thou knowest eek of old al my plesaunce;
Thou knowest also of old all my desires;
Thogh thyn array be badde and yvel biseye,
Though thy dress be bad and in poor condition,
Do thou thy devoir at the leeste weye."
Do thou thy duty at least."
"Nat oonly, lord, that I am glad," quod she,
"Not only, lord, I am glad," said she,
"To doon youre lust, but I desire also
"To do your wishes, but I desire also
Yow for to serve and plese in my degree
You to serve and please in accord with my rank
Withouten feyntyng, and shal everemo;
Without weakening, and shall evermore;
Ne nevere, for no wele ne no wo,
Nor never, for any happiness nor any woe,
Ne shal the goost withinne myn herte stente
Shall the spirit within my heart cease
To love yow best with al my trewe entente."
To love you best with all my true will."
And with that word she gan the hous to dighte,
And with that word she began to prepare the house,
And tables for to sette, and beddes make;
And to set tables, and make beds;
And peyned hire to doon al that she myghte,
And took pains to do all that she could,
Preyynge the chambereres, for Goddes sake,
Praying the chambermaids, for God's sake,
To hasten hem, and faste swepe and shake;
To hasten themselves, and fast sweep and dust;
And she, the mooste servysable of alle,
And she, the most willing to serve of all,
Hath every chambre arrayed and his halle.
Has every chamber prepared and his hall.
Abouten undren gan this erl alighte,
About mid-morning did this earl alight,
That with hym broghte thise noble children tweye,
Who with him brought these noble children two,
For which the peple ran to seen the sighte
For which the people ran to see the sight
Of hire array, so richely biseye;
Of their accoutrements, so rich in appearance;
And thanne at erst amonges hem they seye
And then for the first time amongst themselves they say
That Walter was no fool, thogh that hym leste
That Walter was no fool, though he desired
To chaunge his wyf, for it was for the beste.
To change his wife, for it was for the best.
For she is fairer, as they deemen alle,
For she is fairer, as they all decide,
Than is Grisilde, and moore tendre of age,
Than is Griselda, and more tender of age,
And fairer fruyt bitwene hem sholde falle,
And fairer fruit between them should fall,
And moore plesant, for hire heigh lynage.
And more pleasing, because of her high lineage.
Hir brother eek so fair was of visage
Her brother also so fair was of visage
That hem to seen the peple hath caught plesaunce,
That the people take pleasure in seeing them,
Commendynge now the markys governaunce.
Commending now the marquis's governance.
"O stormy peple! Unsad and evere untrewe!
"O stormy people! Inconstant and ever untrue!
Ay undiscreet and chaungynge as a fane!
Ever undiscerning and changing like a weather vane!
Delitynge evere in rumbul that is newe,
Delighting ever in rumor that is new,
For lyk the moone ay wexe ye and wane!
For like the moon ever you wax and wane!
Ay ful of clappyng, deere ynogh a jane!
Always full of chattering, not worth a penny!
Youre doom is fals, youre constance yvele preeveth;
Your judgment is false, your constancy proves evil;
A ful greet fool is he that on yow leeveth."
A full great fool is he that believes in you."
Thus seyden sadde folk in that citee,
Thus said serious folk in that city,
Whan that the peple gazed up and doun,
When the people gazed up and down,
For they were glad, right for the noveltee,
For they were glad, right for the novelty,
To han a newe lady of hir toun.
To have a new lady of their town.
Namoore of this make I now mencioun,
No more of this make I now mention,
But to Grisilde agayn wol I me dresse,
But to Griselda again will I address myself,
And telle hir constance and hir bisynesse.
And tell her constancy and her diligence.
Ful bisy was Grisilde in every thyng
Full busy was Griselda in every thing
That to the feeste was apertinent.
That was pertaining to the feast.
Right noght was she abayst of hire clothyng,
Not at all was she ashamed of her clothing,
Thogh it were rude and somdeel eek torent;
Though it was crude and also somewhat ragged;
But with glad cheere to the yate is went
But with glad manner to the gate is went
With oother folk to greete the markysesse,
With other folk to greet the marchioness,
And after that dooth forth hire bisynesse.
And after that carries on her work.
With so glad chiere his gestes she receyveth,
With such glad manner his guests she receives,
And so konnyngly, everich in his degree,
And so skillfully, each according to his rank,
That no defaute no man aperceyveth,
That no man perceives any fault,
But ay they wondren what she myghte bee
But ever they wonder who she might be
That in so povre array was for to see,
That in such poor array was to be seen,
And koude swich honour and reverence,
And knew how to do such honor and reverence,
And worthily they preisen hire prudence.
And deservedly they praise her prudence.
In al this meene while she ne stente
In all this mean while she did not cease
This mayde and eek hir brother to commende
This maid and also her brother to commend
With al hir herte, in ful benyngne entente,
With all her heart, in full benign intention,
So wel that no man koude hir pris amende.
So well that no man could praise her more highly.
But atte laste, whan that thise lordes wende
But at the last, when these lords went
To sitten doun to mete, he gan to calle
To sit down to dinner, he called
Grisilde, as she was bisy in his halle.
Griselda, as she was busy in his hall.
"Grisilde," quod he, as it were in his pley,
"Griselda," said he, as if it were a joke,
"How liketh thee my wyf and hire beautee?"
"How do you like my wife and her beauty?"
"Right wel," quod she, "my lord; for, in good fey,
"Right well," said she, "my lord; for, in good faith,
A fairer saugh I nevere noon than she.
I never saw so fair a one as she.
I prey to God yeve hire prosperitee;
I pray to God to give her prosperity;
And so hope I that he wol to yow sende
And so I hope that he will to you send
Plesance ynogh unto youre lyves ende.
Pleasure enough unto your lives' end.
"O thyng biseke I yow, and warne also,
"One thing I beseech you, and warn also,
That ye ne prikke with no tormentynge
That you not distress with any tormenting
This tendre mayden, as ye han doon mo;
This tender maiden, as you have done to others;
For she is fostred in hire norissynge
For she has been reared in her nurture
Moore tendrely, and, to my supposynge,
More tenderly, and, as I believe,
She koude nat adversitee endure
She could not endure adversity
As koude a povre fostred creature."
As could a poorly reared creature."
And whan this Walter saugh hire pacience,
And when this Walter saw her patience,
Hir glade chiere, and no malice at al,
Her glad expression, and no malice at all,
And he so ofte had doon to hire offence,
And he so often had done to her offence,
And she ay sad and constant as a wal,
And she ever steadfast and constant as a wall,
Continuynge evere hire innocence overal,
Continuing ever her innocence in every way,
This sturdy markys gan his herte dresse
This stern marquis inclined his heart
To rewen upon hire wyfly stedfastnesse.
To have pity upon her womanly steadfastness.
"This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he;
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he;
"Be now namoore agast ne yvele apayed.
"Be now no more frightened nor displeased.
I have thy feith and thy benyngnytee,
I have thy faith and thy goodness,
As wel as evere womman was, assayed,
As well as ever woman was, tested,
In greet estaat and povreliche arrayed.
In great estate and in poverty.
Now knowe I, dere wyf, thy stedfastnesse" --
Now I know, dear wife, thy steadfastness" --
And hire in armes took and gan hire kesse.
And took her in arms and kissed her.
And she for wonder took of it no keep;
And she for amazement took of it no notice;
She herde nat what thyng he to hire seyde;
She heard not what thing he said to her;
She ferde as she had stert out of a sleep,
She fared as if she had suddenly awakened out of a sleep,
Til she out of hire mazednesse abreyde.
Until out of her bewilderment she suddenly awoke.
"Grisilde," quod he, "by God, that for us deyde,
"Griselda," said he, "by God, who for us died,
Thou art my wyf, ne noon oother I have,
Thou art my wife, and none other I have,
Ne nevere hadde, as God my soule save!
Nor ever had, as God my soul may save!
"This is thy doghter, which thou hast supposed
"This is thy daughter, which thou hast supposed
To be my wyf; that oother feithfully
To be my wife; that other truly
Shal be myn heir, as I have ay disposed;
Shall be my heir, as I have ever intended;
Thou bare hym in thy body trewely.
Thou bore him in thy body truly.
At Boloigne have I kept hem prively;
At Bologna I have kept them secretly;
Taak hem agayn, for now maystow nat seye
Take them back, for now mayst thou not say
That thou hast lorn noon of thy children tweye.
That thou hast lost any of thy children two.
"And folk that ootherweys han seyd of me,
"And folk that otherwise have said of me,
I warne hem wel that I have doon this deede
I declare to them clearly that I have done this deed
For no malice, ne for no crueltee,
For no malice, nor for no cruelty,
But for t'assaye in thee thy wommanheede,
But to test in thee thy womanhood,
And nat to sleen my children -- God forbeede! --
And not to slay my children -- God forbid! --
But for to kepe hem pryvely and stille,
But to keep them secretly and quietly,
Til I thy purpos knewe and al thy wille."
Until I knew thy perseverence and all thy will."
Whan she this herde, aswowne doun she falleth
When she heard this, down she falls in a swoon
For pitous joye, and after hire swownynge
For pitiful joy, and after her swooning
She bothe hire yonge children to hire calleth,
She calls both her young children to her,
And in hire armes, pitously wepynge,
And in her arms, pitifully weeping,
Embraceth hem, and tendrely kissynge
Embraces them, and tenderly kissing
Ful lyk a mooder, with hire salte teeres
Full like a mother, with her salt tears
She bathed bothe hire visage and hire heeres.
She bathed both their visage and their hair.
O which a pitous thyng it was to se
O what a pathetic thing it was to see
Hir swownyng, and hire humble voys to heere!
Her swooning, and her humble voice to hear!
"Grauntmercy, lord, God thanke it yow," quod she,
"Great thanks, lord, may God repay it to you," said she,
"That ye han saved me my children deere!
"That you have saved for me my children dear!
Now rekke I nevere to been deed right heere;
Now care I never to be dead right here;
Sith I stonde in youre love and in youre grace,
Since I stand in your love and in your grace,
No fors of deeth, ne whan my spirit pace!
Death does not matter, nor when my spirit may pass (away)!
"O tendre, o deere, o yonge children myne!
"O tender, o dear, o my young children!
Youre woful mooder wende stedfastly
Your woeful mother truly believed
That crueel houndes or som foul vermyne
That cruel hounds or some foul animal pests
Hadde eten yow; but God of his mercy
Had eaten you; but God of his mercy
And youre benyngne fader tendrely
And your benign father tenderly
Hath doon yow kept" -- and in that same stounde
Has had you protected" -- and in that same moment
Al sodeynly she swapte adoun to grounde.
All suddenly she fell down to the ground.
And in hire swough so sadly holdeth she
And in her swoon so tightly holds she
Hire children two, whan she gan hem t'embrace,
Her children two, when she embraced them,
That with greet sleighte and greet difficultee
That with great effort and great difficulty
The children from hire arm they gonne arace.
The children from her arm they did tear away.
O many a teere on many a pitous face
O many a tear on many a pitiful face
Doun ran of hem that stooden hire bisyde;
Down ran of them that stood beside her;
Unnethe abouten hire myghte they abyde.
Hardly about her might they remain.
Walter hire gladeth and hire sorwe slaketh;
Walter comforts her and her sorrow relieves;
She riseth up, abaysed, from hire traunce,
She rises up, disconcerted, from her trance,
And every wight hire joye and feeste maketh
And every person makes joy and festivity for her
Til she hath caught agayn hire contenaunce.
Until she has regained her composure.
Walter hire dooth so feithfully plesaunce
Walter strives so faithfully to please her
That it was deyntee for to seen the cheere
That it was delightful to see the happiness
Bitwixe hem two, now they been met yfeere.
Between them two, now they are met together.
Thise ladyes, whan that they hir tyme say,
These ladies, when they see their time,
Han taken hire and into chambre gon,
Have taken her and into chamber they go,
And strepen hire out of hire rude array,
And strip her out of her crude clothing,
And in a clooth of gold that brighte shoon,
And in a cloth of gold that brightly shone,
With a coroune of many a riche stoon
With a crown of many a rich stone
Upon hire heed, they into halle hire broghte,
Upon her head, they into hall her brought,
And ther she was honured as hire oghte.
And there she was honored as she deserved.
Thus hath this pitous day a blisful ende,
Thus has this pitiful day a blissful end,
For every man and womman dooth his myght
For every man and woman does his might
This day in murthe and revel to dispende
This day in mirth and revel to spend
Til on the welkne shoon the sterres lyght.
Until in the sky shone the stars' light.
For moore solempne in every mannes syght
For more splendid in every man's sight
This feste was, and gretter of costage,
This feast was, and greater of cost,
Than was the revel of hire mariage.
Than was the revel of their marriage.
Ful many a yeer in heigh prosperitee
Full many a year in high prosperity
Lyven thise two in concord and in reste,
Live these two in peace and in quiet,
And richely his doghter maryed he
And richly his daughter married he
Unto a lord, oon of the worthieste
Unto a lord, one of the worthiest
Of al Ytaille; and thanne in pees and reste
Of all Italy; and then in peace and rest
His wyves fader in his court he kepeth,
His wife's father in his court he keeps,
Til that the soule out of his body crepeth.
Until the soul out of his body creeps.
His sone succedeth in his heritage
His son succeeds in his heritage
In reste and pees, after his fader day,
In rest and peace, after his father's day,
And fortunat was eek in mariage,
And fortunate was also in marriage,
Al putte he nat his wyf in greet assay.
Although he put not his wife in great tests.
This world is nat so strong, it is no nay,
This world is not so strong, there is no denying,
As it hath been in olde tymes yoore,
As it has been in old times long ago,
And herkneth what this auctour seith therfoore.
And listen to what this author says concerning this (tale).
This storie is seyd nat for that wyves sholde
This story is said not so that wives should
Folwen Grisilde as in humylitee,
Follow Griselda in humility,
For it were inportable, though they wolde,
For it would be intolerable, though they would (want to),
But for that every wight, in his degree,
But so that every person, in his station in life,
Sholde be constant in adversitee
Should be constant in adversity
As was Grisilde; therfore Petrak writeth
As was Griselda; therefore Petrarch writes
This storie, which with heigh stile he enditeth.
This story, which with high style he composes.
For sith a womman was so pacient
For since a woman was so patient
Unto a mortal man, wel moore us oghte
Unto a mortal man, well more we ought to
Receyven al in gree that God us sent;
Receive with a good will all that God sends us;
For greet skile is he preeve that he wroghte.
For it is very reasonable that he test what he made.
But he ne tempteth no man that he boghte,
But he tests no man that he redeemed,
As seith Seint Jame, if ye his pistel rede;
As says Saint James, if you his epistle read;
He preeveth folk al day, it is no drede,
He tests folk all the time, it is no doubt,
And suffreth us, as for oure excercise,
And permits us, for our own good
With sharpe scourges of adversitee
With sharp whips of adversity
Ful ofte to be bete in sondry wise;
Full often to be beaten in various ways;
Nat for to knowe oure wyl, for certes he,
Not to know our will, for certainly he,
Er we were born, knew al oure freletee;
Before we were born, knew all our frailty;
And for oure beste is al his governaunce.
And for our best is all his governance.
Lat us thanne lyve in vertuous suffraunce.
Let us then live in virtuous forbearance.
But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:
But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;
In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if that they were put to swiche assayes,
For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes
The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.
It would rather break in two than bend.
For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In heigh maistrie, and elles were it scathe --
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.
And let us stint of serious matter.
Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:
Hear my song that says in this manner:
Lenvoy de Chaucer.
Chaucer's envoy.
Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;
And both together buried in Italy;
For which I crie in open audience
For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so hardy be t'assaille
No wedded man so bold be to test
His wyves pacience in trust to fynde
His wife's patience trusting to find
Grisildis, for in certein he shal faille.
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,
O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille
To write about you a story of such marvel
As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,
As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But evere answereth at the countretaille.
But ever answers in reply.
Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,
Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But sharply taak on yow the governaille.
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
For commune profit sith it may availle.
Since it may work to the benefit of all.
Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;
Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.
Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,
And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,
Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thyn housbonde armed be in maille,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,
If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;
To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And lat hym care, and wepe, and wrynge, and waille!
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
Bihoold the murye words of the Host
This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,
When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
Me were levere than a barel ale
I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!
My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a gentil tale for the nones,
This is a fine tale for this occasion,
As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;
For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thyng that wol nat be, lat it be stille."
But thing that will not be, let it be still."
But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:
But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;
In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if that they were put to swiche assayes,
For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes
The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.
It would rather break in two than bend.
For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In heigh maistrie, and elles were it scathe --
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.
And let us stint of serious matter.
Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:
Hear my song that says in this manner:
Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;
And both together buried in Italy;
For which I crie in open audience
For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so hardy be t'assaille
No wedded man so bold be to test
His wyves pacience in trust to fynde
His wife's patience trusting to find
Grisildis, for in certein he shal faille.
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,
O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille
To write about you a story of such marvel
As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,
As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But evere answereth at the countretaille.
But ever answers in reply.
Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,
Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But sharply taak on yow the governaille.
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
For commune profit sith it may availle.
Since it may work to the benefit of all.
Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;
Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.
Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,
And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,
Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thyn housbonde armed be in maille,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,
If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;
To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And lat hym care, and wepe, and wrynge, and waille!
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
Bihoold the murye words of the Host
Behold, the merry words of the Host.
This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,
When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
Me were levere than a barel ale
I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!
My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a gentil tale for the nones,
This is a fine tale for this occasion,
As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;
For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thyng that wol nat be, lat it be stille."
But thing that will not be, let it be still."
