The Prologe of the Cokes Tale
The Prologue of the Cook's Tale
The Cook of Londoun, whil the Reve spak,
The Cook of London, while the Reeve spoke,
For joye him thoughte he clawed him on the bak.
Was so happy he thought the Reeve scratched him on the back.
"Ha! ha!" quod he, "For Cristes passion,
"Ha! ha!" said he, "For Christ's passion,
This millere hadde a sharp conclusion
This miller had a sharp conclusion
Upon his argument of herbergage!
To his logical argument about lodging!
Wel seyde Salomon in his langage,
Well said Salomon in his language,
`Ne bryng nat every man into thyn hous,'
`Do not bring every man into thy house,'
For herberwynge by nyghte is perilous.
For providing lodging by night is perilous.
Wel oghte a man avysed for to be
Well ought a man to take heed
Whom that he broghte into his pryvetee.
Whom he brings into his private home.
I pray to God, so yeve me sorwe and care
I pray to God, give me sorrow and care
If evere, sitthe I highte Hogge of Ware,
If ever, since I was called Roger of Ware,
Herde I a millere bettre yset a-werk.
I heard a miller better set to work (tricked).
He hadde a jape of malice in the derk.
He had a malicious trick played on him in the dark.
But God forbede that we stynte heere;
But God forbid that we stop here;
And therfore, if ye vouche-sauf to heere
And therefore, if you agree to hear
A tale of me, that am a povre man,
A tale by me, who am a poor man,
I wol yow telle, as wel as evere I kan,
I will tell you, as well as ever I can,
A litel jape that fil in oure citee."
A little amusing affair that happened in our city."
Oure Hoost answerde and seide, "I graunte it thee.
Our Host answered and said, "I grant it to thee.
Now telle on, Roger; looke that it be good,
Now tell on, Roger; look that it be good,
For many a pastee hastow laten blood,
For of many a pastry hast thou drawn out the gravy,
And many a Jakke of Dovere hastow soold
And many a Jack of Dover (a kind of pie) hast thou sold
That hath been twies hoot and twies coold.
That has been twice hot and twice cold.
Of many a pilgrym hastow Cristes curs,
Of many a pilgrim hast thou Christ's curse,
For of thy percely yet they fare the wors,
For of thy parsley yet they fare the worse,
That they han eten with thy stubbel goos,
Which they have eaten with thy stubble-fed goose,
For in thy shoppe is many a flye loos.
For in thy shop is many a fly loose.
Now telle on, gentil Roger by thy name.
Now tell on, gentle Roger by thy name.
But yet I pray thee, be nat wroth for game;
But yet I pray thee, be not angry about a joke;
A man may seye ful sooth in game and pley."
A man may speak very truthfully in joking and play."
"Thou seist ful sooth," quod Roger, "by my fey!
"Thou sayest the truth," said Roger, "by my faith!
But `sooth pley, quaad pley,' as the Flemyng seith.
But `a true jest is a bad jest,' as the Fleming says.
And therfore, Herry Bailly, by thy feith,
And therefore, Harry Bailly, by thy faith,
Be thou nat wrooth, er we departen heer,
Be thou not angry, ere we depart here,
Though that my tale be of an hostileer.
Even though my tale is of an inn-keeper.
But nathelees I wol nat telle it yit;
But nonetheless I will not tell it yet;
But er we parte, ywis, thou shalt be quit."
But before we part, indeed, thou shalt be repaid."
And therwithal he lough and made cheere,
And with that he laughed and made good cheer,
And seyde his tale, as ye shul after heere.
And told his tale, as you shall next hear.
Heere bigynneth the Cookes Tale.
Here begins the Cook's Tale.
A prentys whilom dwelled in oure citee,
A apprentice once dwelt in our city,
And of a craft of vitailliers was hee.
And of a craft of food merchants was he.
Gaillard he was as goldfynch in the shawe,
Gaily dressed he was as is a goldfinch in the woods,
Broun as a berye, a propre short felawe,
Brown as a berry, a good-looking short fellow,
With lokkes blake, ykembd ful fetisly.
With locks black, combed full elegantly.
Dauncen he koude so wel and jolily
He could dance so well and jollily
That he was cleped Perkyn Revelour.
That he was called Perkin Reveler.
He was as ful of love and paramour
He was as full of love and womanizing
As is the hyve ful of hony sweete;
As is the hive full of honey sweet;
Wel was the wenche with hym myghte meete.
Happy was the wench who with him might meet.
At every bridale wolde he synge and hoppe;
At every wedding party he would sing and dance;
He loved bet the taverne than the shoppe.
He loved the tavern better than the shop.
For whan ther any ridyng was in Chepe,
For when there was any procession in Cheapside,
Out of the shoppe thider wolde he lepe --
Out of the shop thither would he leap --
Til that he hadde al the sighte yseyn,
Until that he had all the sight seen,
And daunced wel, he wolde nat come ayeyn --
And danced well, he would not come back--
And gadered hym a meynee of his sort
And gathered him a company of his sort
To hoppe and synge and maken swich disport;
To dance and sing and make such merriment;
And ther they setten stevene for to meete,
And there they agreed on a time to meet,
To pleyen at the dys in swich a streete.
To play at dice in such and such a street.
For in the toune nas ther no prentys
For in the town there was no apprentice
That fairer koude caste a paire of dys
That could better throw a pair of dice
Than Perkyn koude, and therto he was free
Than Perkin could, and thereto he was free
Of his dispense, in place of pryvetee.
In his spending, in a private place.
That fond his maister wel in his chaffare,
That found his master easily in his business accounts,
For often tyme he foond his box ful bare.
For many times he found his cash box completely bare.
For sikerly a prentys revelour
For surely (in the case of) an revelling apprentice
That haunteth dys, riot, or paramour,
Who makes a practice of dicing, debauchery, or womanizing,
His maister shal it in his shoppe abye,
His master shall pay for it in his shop,
Al have he no part of the mynstralcye.
Even though he has no share of the entertainment (for which he pays).
For thefte and riot, they been convertible,
For theft and debauchery, they are interchangeable.
Al konne he pleye on gyterne or ribible.
Even though he knows how to play on guitar or fiddle.
Revel and trouthe, as in a lowe degree,
Revelling and honesty, in one of low degree,
They been ful wrothe al day, as men may see.
Are always incompatible, as anyone can see.
This joly prentys with his maister bood,
This jolly apprentice with his master remained,
Til he were ny out of his prentishood,
Until he was nearly out of his apprenticeship,
Al were he snybbed bothe erly and late,
Although he was rebuked both early and late,
And somtyme lad with revel to Newegate.
And sometimes taken (as a prisoner) with music to Newgate prison.
But atte laste his maister hym bithoghte,
But at the last his master remembered,
Upon a day, whan he his papir soghte,
Upon a day, when Perkin sought his certificate of release,
Of a proverbe that seith this same word:
A proverb that says this same word:
"Wel bet is roten appul out of hoord
"Well better is a rotten apple out of the store
Than that it rotie al the remenaunt."
Than that it rot al the remnant."
So fareth it by a riotous servaunt;
So fares it with a debauched servant;
It is ful lasse harm to lete hym pace,
It is much less harm to let him go away,
Than he shende alle the servantz in the place.
Than that he should ruin all the servants in the place.
Therfore his maister yaf hym acquitance,
Therefore his master gave him his certificate,
And bad hym go, with sorwe and with meschance!
And ordered him to go, with sorrow and with bad luck!
And thus this joly prentys hadde his leve.
And thus this jolly apprentice had his leave.
Now lat hym riote al the nyght or leve.
Now let him revel all the night or leave off (do as he chooses).
And for ther is no theef withoute a lowke,
And because there is no thief without an accomplice,
That helpeth hym to wasten and to sowke
Who helps him to waste and to consume
Of that he brybe kan or borwe may,
That which he can steal or may borrow,
Anon he sente his bed and his array
Right away he sent his bed and his clothing
Unto a compeer of his owene sort,
Unto a companion of his own sort,
That lovede dys, and revel, and disport,
Who loved dicing, and revelling, and having fun,
And hadde a wyf that heeld for contenance
And had a wife that kept for the sake of appearances
A shoppe, and swyved for hir sustenance.
A shop, and screwed for her living.
