The Prologe of the Frankeleyns Tale
The Prologue of the Franklin's Tale
Thise olde gentil Britouns in hir dayes
These old noble Bretons in their days
Of diverse aventures maden layes,
Of diverse adventures made lays,
Rymeyed in hir firste Briton tonge,
Rhymed in their first Breton tongue,
Whiche layes with hir instrumentz they songe
Which lays with their instruments they sang
Or elles redden hem for hir plesaunce;
Or else read them for their pleasure;
And oon of hem have I in remembraunce,
And one of them have I in remembrance,
Which I shal seyn with good wyl as I kan.
Which I shall say with as good will as I can.
But, sires, by cause I am a burel man,
But, sirs, because I am an unlearned man,
At my bigynnyng first I yow biseche,
At my beginning first I you beseech,
Have me excused of my rude speche.
Have me excused for my rude speech.
I lerned nevere rethorik, certeyn;
I learned never rhetoric, certainly;
Thyng that I speke, it moot be bare and pleyn.
Thing that I speak, it must be bare and plain.
I sleep nevere on the Mount of Pernaso,
I slept never on the Mount of Parnassus,
Ne lerned Marcus Tullius Scithero.
Nor learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Colours ne knowe I none, withouten drede,
Colors know I none, without doubt,
But swiche colours as growen in the mede,
But such colors as grow in the field,
Or elles swiche as men dye or peynte.
Or else such as men dye or paint.
Colours of rethoryk been to me queynte;
Colors of rhetoric (figures of speech) are strange to me;
My spirit feeleth noght of swich mateere.
My spirit feels nothing of such matter.
But if yow list, my tale shul ye heere.
But if you wish, you shall hear my tale.
Here bigynneth the Frankeleyns Tale
Here begins the Franklin's Tale.
In Armorik, that called is Britayne,
In Armorica, that is called Brittany,
Ther was a knyght that loved and dide his payne
There was a knight that loved and worked hard
To serve a lady in his beste wise;
To serve a lady in his best manner;
And many a labour, many a greet emprise,
And many a labor, many a great chivalric exploit,
He for his lady wroghte er she were wonne.
He wrought for his lady before she was won.
For she was oon the faireste under sonne,
For she was the fairest of all under the sun,
And eek therto comen of so heigh kynrede
And also moreover come of such noble ancestry
That wel unnethes dorste this knyght, for drede,
That this knight hardly dared, for fear,
Telle hire his wo, his peyne, and his distresse.
Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.
But atte laste she, for his worthynesse,
But at the last she, for his worthiness,
And namely for his meke obeysaunce,
And namely for his meek submission,
Hath swich a pitee caught of his penaunce
Has taken such a pity on his suffering
That pryvely she fil of his accord
That privately she agreed with him
To take hym for hir housbonde and hir lord,
To take him for her husband and hir lord,
Of swich lordshipe as men han over hir wyves.
Of such lordship as men have over their wives.
And for to lede the moore in blisse hir lyves,
And to lead the more blissfully their lives,
Of his free wyl he swoor hire as a knyght
Of his free will he swore her as a knight
That nevere in al his lyf he, day ne nyght,
That never in all his life he, day or night,
Ne sholde upon hym take no maistrie
Should take upon himself any mastery
Agayn hir wyl, ne kithe hire jalousie,
Against her will, nor show her jealousy,
But hire obeye, and folwe hir wyl in al,
But obey her, and follow her will in everything,
As any lovere to his lady shal,
As any lover to his lady should,
Save that the name of soveraynetee,
Except for the appearance of sovereignty,
That wolde he have for shame of his degree.
Which he would have to avoid bringing shame on his status (of knighthood).
She thanked hym, and with ful greet humblesse
She thanked him, and with full great humbleness
She seyde, "Sire, sith of youre gentillesse
She said, "Sir, since of your nobility
Ye profre me to have so large a reyne,
You offer me to have such freedom from restraint,
Ne wolde nevere God bitwixe us tweyne,
And would God that never between us two,
As in my gilt, were outher werre or stryf.
Through my fault, should be either war or strife.
Sire, I wol be youre humble trewe wyf --
Sir, I will be your humble true wife --
Have heer my trouthe -- til that myn herte breste."
Have here my pledge -- until my heart bursts (until I die)."
Thus been they bothe in quiete and in reste.
Thus are they both in quiet and in peace.
For o thyng, sires, saufly dar I seye,
For one thing, sirs, I dare say confidently,
That freendes everych oother moot obeye,
That friends must obey each other,
If they wol longe holden compaignye.
If they will long hold company.
Love wol nat been constreyned by maistrye.
Love will not be constrained by mastery.
Whan maistrie comth, the God of Love anon
When mastery comes, the God of Love immediately
Beteth his wynges, and farewel, he is gon!
Beats his wings, and farewell, he is gone!
Love is a thyng as any spirit free.
Love is a thing free as any spirit.
Wommen, of kynde, desiren libertee,
Women, by nature, desire liberty,
And nat to been constreyned as a thral;
And not to be constrained like a slave;
And so doon men, if I sooth seyen shal.
And so do men, if I shall say the truth.
Looke who that is moost pacient in love,
Look who is most patient in love,
He is at his avantage al above.
He is in the best position, superior to all.
Pacience is an heigh vertu, certeyn,
Patience is a noble virtue, certainly,
For it venquysseth, as thise clerkes seyn,
For it vanquishes, as these clerks say,
Thynges that rigour sholde nevere atteyne.
Things that rigor should never attain.
For every word men may nat chide or pleyne.
One may not chide or complain for every word.
Lerneth to suffre, or elles, so moot I goon,
Learn to suffer, or else, as I may walk (I swear),
Ye shul it lerne, wher so ye wole or noon;
You shall learn it, whether you want to or not;
For in this world, certein, ther no wight is
For in this world, certainly, there is no person
That he ne dooth or seith somtyme amys.
Who does not sometime do or speak amiss.
Ire, siknesse, or constellacioun,
Ire, sickness, or the position of the stars,
Wyn, wo, or chaungynge of complexioun
Wine, woe, or changing of the balance of bodily humors
Causeth ful ofte to doon amys or speken.
Causes (one) very often to do or speak amiss.
On every wrong a man may nat be wreken.
On every wrong a man can not be avenged.
After the tyme moste be temperaunce
There must be moderation suitable to the occasion
To every wight that kan on governaunce.
By every person who knows about governance.
And therfore hath this wise, worthy knyght,
And therefore has this wise, worthy knight,
To lyve in ese, suffrance hire bihight,
To live in ease, promised her forbearance,
And she to hym ful wisly gan to swere
And she to him full truly did swear
That nevere sholde ther be defaute in here.
That never should there be fault in her.
Heere may men seen an humble, wys accord;
Here may men see a humble, wise accord;
Thus hath she take hir servant and hir lord --
Thus has she taken her servant and her lord --
Servant in love, and lord in mariage.
Servant in love, and lord in marriage.
Thanne was he bothe in lordshipe and servage.
Then was he both in lordship and servitude.
Servage? Nay, but in lordshipe above,
Servitude? Nay, but in lordship above,
Sith he hath bothe his lady and his love;
Since he has both his lady and his love;
His lady, certes, and his wyf also,
His lady, certainly, and his wife also,
The which that lawe of love acordeth to.
The which accords to the law of love.
And whan he was in this prosperitee,
And when he was in this happy state,
Hoom with his wyf he gooth to his contree,
Home with his wife he goes to his country,
Nat fer fro Pedmark, ther his dwellyng was,
Not far from Pedmark, where his dwelling was,
Where as he lyveth in blisse and in solas.
Where he lives in bliss and in pleasure.
Who koude telle, but he hadde wedded be,
Who could tell, unless he had been wedded,
The joye, the ese, and the prosperitee
The joy, the ease, and the happiness
That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf?
That is between a husband and his wife?
A yeer and moore lasted this blisful lyf,
A year and more lasted this blissful life,
Til that the knyght of which I speke of thus,
Until the knight of whom I thus speak,
That of Kayrrud was cleped Arveragus,
That was called Arveragus of Kayrrud,
Shoop hym to goon and dwelle a yeer or tweyne
Prepared himself to go and dwell a year or two
In Engelond, that cleped was eek Briteyne,
In England, which was also called Britain,
To seke in armes worshipe and honour --
To seek in arms good reputation and honor --
For al his lust he sette in swich labour --
For he set all his desire in such labor --
And dwelled there two yeer; the book seith thus.
And dwelled there two years; the book says thus.
Now wol I stynten of this Arveragus,
Now will I stop (speaking) of this Arveragus,
And speken I wole of Dorigen his wyf,
And I will speak of Dorigen his wife,
That loveth hire housbonde as hire hertes lyf.
Who loves her husband as her heart's life.
For his absence wepeth she and siketh,
For his absence she weeps and sighs,
As doon thise noble wyves whan hem liketh.
As do these noble wives when it pleases them.
She moorneth, waketh, wayleth, fasteth, pleyneth;
She mourns, stays awake, wails, fasts, complains;
Desir of his presence hire so destreyneth
Desire of his presence so presses upon her
That al this wyde world she sette at noght.
That all this wide world she reckoned as worth nothing.
Hire freendes, whiche that knewe hir hevy thoght,
Her friends, who knew her gloomy thought,
Conforten hire in al that ever they may.
Comfort her in all that ever they can.
They prechen hire, they telle hire nyght and day
They preach to her, they tell her night and day
That causelees she sleeth hirself, allas!
That she slays herself without cause, alas!
And every confort possible in this cas
And every comfort possible in this case
They doon to hire with al hire bisynesse,
They do to her with all their concern,
Al for to make hire leve hire hevynesse.
All to make her leave her sadness.
By proces, as ye knowen everichoon,
In the course of time, as every one of you knows,
Men may so longe graven in a stoon
One may so long engrave on a stone
Til som figure therinne emprented be.
Until some figure is imprinted upon it.
So longe han they conforted hire til she
So long have they comforted her until she
Receyved hath, by hope and by resoun,
Received has, by hope and by reason,
The emprentyng of hire consolacioun,
The imprint of their consolation,
Thurgh which hir grete sorwe gan aswage;
Through which her great sorrow began to be relieved;
She may nat alwey duren in swich rage.
She can not always continue in such passionate grief.
And eek Arveragus, in al this care,
And also Arveragus, in (the midst of) all this care,
Hath sent hire lettres hoom of his welfare,
Has sent her letters home (telling) of his welfare,
And that he wol come hastily agayn;
And that he will come hastily again;
Or elles hadde this sorwe hir herte slayn.
Or else this sorrow would have slain her heart.
Hire freendes sawe hir sorwe gan to slake
Her friends saw her sorrow began to slacken
And preyde hire on knees, for Goddes sake,
And prayed her on their knees, for God's sake,
To come and romen hire in compaignye,
To come and walk about in company,
Awey to dryve hire derke fantasye.
Away to drive her dark imagining.
And finally she graunted that requeste,
And finally she granted that request,
For wel she saugh that it was for the beste.
For well she saw that it was for the best.
Now stood hire castel faste by the see,
Now her castle stood close by the sea,
And often with hire freendes walketh shee
And often with her friends she walks
Hire to disporte upon the bank an heigh,
To amuse herself upon the bank on high,
Where as she many a ship and barge seigh
Where she saw many a ship and sailing vessel
Seillynge hir cours, where as hem liste go.
Sailing their course, where it pleases them to go.
But thanne was that a parcel of hire wo,
But then was that a portion of her woe,
For to hirself ful ofte, "Allas!" seith she,
For to herself full often, she says "Alas!",
"Is ther no ship, of so manye as I se,
"Is there no ship, of so many as I see,
Wol bryngen hom my lord? Thanne were myn herte
Will bring home my lord? Then would my heart be
Al warisshed of his bittre peynes smerte."
All cured of its bitter, sharp pains."
Another tyme ther wolde she sitte and thynke,
Another time there would she sit and think,
And caste hir eyen dounward fro the brynke.
And cast her eyes downward from the brink.
But whan she saugh the grisly rokkes blake,
But when she saw the grisly black rocks,
For verray feere so wolde hir herte quake
For sheer fear her heart would so quake
That on hire feet she myghte hire noght sustene.
That on her feet she could not sustain herself.
Thanne wolde she sitte adoun upon the grene,
Then would she sit down upon the green,
And pitously into the see biholde,
And piteously stare into the sea,
And seyn right thus, with sorweful sikes colde:
And say right thus, with sorrowful, cold sighs:
"Eterne God, that thurgh thy purveiaunce
"Eternal God, who through thy foreknowledge
Ledest the world by certein governaunce,
Leads the world by sure governance,
In ydel, as men seyn, ye no thyng make.
Men say you make nothing in vain.
But, Lord, thise grisly feendly rokkes blake,
But, Lord, these grisly fiendish black rocks,
That semen rather a foul confusion
That seem rather a foul confusion
Of werk than any fair creacion
Of work than any fair creation
Of swich a parfit wys God and a stable,
Of such a perfectly wise and stable God,
Why han ye wroght this werk unresonable?
Why have you created this unreasonable work?
For by this werk, south, north, ne west, ne eest,
For by this work, south, north, nor west, nor east,
Ther nys yfostred man, ne bryd, ne beest;
There is no benefit to man, nor bird, nor beast;
It dooth no good, to my wit, but anoyeth.
It does no good, to my understanding, but does harm.
Se ye nat, Lord, how mankynde it destroyeth?
See you not, Lord, how it destroys mankind?
An hundred thousand bodyes of mankynde
A hundred thousand bodies of mankind
Han rokkes slayn, al be they nat in mynde,
Have rocks slain, although their names are forgotten,
Which mankynde is so fair part of thy werk
And this mankind is so fair a part of thy work
That thou it madest lyk to thyn owene merk.
That thou made it like to thine own image.
Thanne semed it ye hadde a greet chiertee
Then it seemed you had a great love
Toward mankynde; but how thanne may it bee
Toward mankind; but how then may it be
That ye swiche meenes make it to destroyen,
That you make such means to destroy it,
Whiche meenes do no good, but evere anoyen?
Which means do no good, but always cause trouble?
I woot wel clerkes wol seyn as hem leste,
I know well clerks will say as they please,
By argumentz, that al is for the beste,
By logical reasoning, that all is for the best,
Though I ne kan the causes nat yknowe.
Though I can not know the causes.
But thilke God that made wynd to blowe
But that same God that made wind to blow
As kepe my lord! This my conclusion.
Keep my lord! This is my conclusion.
To clerkes lete I al disputison.
To clerks I leave all disputation.
But wolde God that alle thise rokkes blake
But would God that all these black rocks
Were sonken into helle for his sake!
Were sunk into hell for his sake!
Thise rokkes sleen myn herte for the feere."
These rocks slay my heart for fear."
Thus wolde she seyn, with many a pitous teere.
Thus would she say, with many a piteous tear.
Hire freendes sawe that it was no disport
Her friends saw that it was no pleasure
To romen by the see, but disconfort,
To roam by the sea, but discomfort,
And shopen for to pleyen somwher elles.
And decide to amuse themselves somewhere else.
They leden hire by ryveres and by welles,
They lead her by rivers and by springs,
And eek in othere places delitables;
And also in other delightful places;
They dauncen and they pleyen at ches and tables.
They dance and they play at chess and backgammon.
So on a day, right in the morwe-tyde,
So on a day, early in the morning-tide,
Unto a gardyn that was ther bisyde,
Unto a garden that was there nearby,
In which that they hadde maad hir ordinaunce
In which they had made their arrangement
Of vitaille and of oother purveiaunce,
For victuals and for other provisions,
They goon and pleye hem al the longe day.
They go and amuse themselves all the long day.
And this was on the sixte morwe of May,
And this was on the sixth morning of May,
Which May hadde peynted with his softe shoures
Which May had painted with its soft showers
This gardyn ful of leves and of floures;
This garden full of leaves and of flowers;
And craft of mannes hand so curiously
And craft of man's hand so skillfully
Arrayed hadde this gardyn, trewely,
Had adorned this garden, truly,
That nevere was ther gardyn of swich prys
That never was there garden of such worth
But if it were the verray paradys.
Unless it were the true paradise.
The odour of floures and the fresshe sighte
The odor of flowers and the fresh sight
Wolde han maked any herte lighte
Would have made any heart light
That evere was born, but if to greet siknesse
That ever was born, unless too great sickness
Or to greet sorwe helde it in distresse,
Or too great sorrow held it in distress,
So ful it was of beautee with plesaunce.
It was so full of beauty with pleasure.
At after-dyner gonne they to daunce,
After dinner they go to dance,
And synge also, save Dorigen allone,
And sing also, save Dorigen alone,
Which made alwey hir compleint and hir moone,
Who made always her complaint and her moan,
For she ne saugh hym on the daunce go
For she did not see him on the dance go
That was hir housbonde and hir love also.
Who was her husband and her love also.
But nathelees she moste a tyme abyde
But nonetheless she must a time abide
And with good hope lete hir sorwe slyde.
And with good hope let her sorrow slip away.
Upon this daunce, amonges othere men,
In this dance, among other men,
Daunced a squier biforn Dorigen,
Danced a squire before Dorigen,
That fressher was and jolyer of array,
Who was more lively and more gaily dressed,
As to my doom, than is the month of May.
As to my judgement, than is the month of May.
He syngeth, daunceth, passynge any man
He sings, dances, passing any man
That is, or was, sith that the world bigan.
That is, or was, since the world began.
Therwith he was, if men sholde hym discryve,
Therewith he was, if one should him describe,
Oon of the beste farynge man on lyve;
One of the most handsome men alive;
Yong, strong, right vertuous, and riche, and wys,
Young, strong, very valiant, and rich, and wise,
And wel biloved, and holden in greet prys.
And well beloved, and held in great esteem.
And shortly, if the sothe I tellen shal,
And shortly, if I shall tell the truth,
Unwityng of this Dorigen at al,
Unknown by this Dorigen at all,
This lusty squier, servant to Venus,
This lusty squire, servant to Venus,
Which that ycleped was Aurelius,
Who was called Aurelius,
Hadde loved hire best of any creature
Had loved her best of any creature
Two yeer and moore, as was his aventure,
Two years and more, as was his fate,
But nevere dorste he tellen hire his grevaunce.
But he never dared tell her his grievance.
Withouten coppe he drank al his penaunce.
Copiously he drank all his penance (suffered intensely).
He was despeyred; no thyng dorste he seye,
He was in despair; he dared say nothing,
Save in his songes somwhat wolde he wreye
Except in his songs somewhat he would reveal
His wo, as in a general compleynyng;
His woe, as in a general lament;
He seyde he lovede and was biloved no thyng.
He said he loved and was in no way loved in return
Of swich matere made he manye layes,
Of such subject matter made he many lays,
Songes, compleintes, roundels, virelayes,
Songs, complaints, roundels, virelays,
How that he dorste nat his sorwe telle,
(Saying) how he dared not his sorrow tell,
But langwissheth as a furye dooth in helle;
But suffers as a fury does in hell;
And dye he moste, he seyde, as dide Ekko
And he must die, he said, as did Echo
For Narcisus, that dorste nat telle hir wo.
For Narcissus, she who dared not tell her woe.
In oother manere than ye heere me seye,
In other ways than you hear me say,
Ne dorste he nat to hire his wo biwreye,
He dared not reveal to her his woe,
Save that, paraventure, somtyme at daunces,
Except that, by chance, sometimes at dances,
Ther yonge folk kepen hir observaunces,
Where young folk observe their customs (of courtship),
It may wel be he looked on hir face
It may well be he looked on her face
In swich a wise as man that asketh grace;
In such a manner as a man that asks for grace;
But nothyng wiste she of his entente.
But she knew nothing of his intent.
Nathelees it happed, er they thennes wente,
Nonetheless it happened, before they went away,
By cause that he was hire neighebour,
Because he was her neighbor,
And was a man of worshipe and honour,
And was a man of good reputation and honor,
And hadde yknowen hym of tyme yoore,
And (she) had known him for a long time,
They fille in speche; and forth, moore and moore,
They fell in speech; and forth, more and more,
Unto his purpos drough Aurelius,
Unto his purpose drew Aurelius,
And whan he saugh his tyme, he seyde thus:
And when he saw his time, he said thus:
"Madame," quod he, "by God that this world made,
"Madame," he said, "by God that this world made,
So that I wiste it myghte youre herte glade,
Providing that I knew it might gladden your heart,
I wolde that day that youre Arveragus
I wish that day that your Arveragus
Wente over the see, that I, Aurelius,
Went over the sea, that I, Aurelius,
Hadde went ther nevere I sholde have come agayn.
Had went from where I should never have come back.
For wel I woot my servyce is in vayn;
For well I know my service is in vain;
My gerdon is but brestyng of myn herte.
My reward is but the breaking of my heart.
Madame, reweth upon my peynes smerte;
Madame, have pity upon my bitter pains;
For with a word ye may me sleen or save.
For with one word you may me slay or save.
Heere at youre feet God wolde that I were grave!
Here at your feet would God that I were buried!
I ne have as now no leyser moore to seye;
I have now no opportunity to say more;
Have mercy, sweete, or ye wol do me deye!"
Have mercy, sweet, or you will make me die!"
She gan to looke upon Aurelius;
She did look upon Aurelius;
"Is this youre wyl," quod she, "and sey ye thus?
"Is this your desire," said she, "and say you thus?
Nevere erst," quod she, "ne wiste I what ye mente.
Never before," she said, "Did I know what you meant.
But now, Aurelie, I knowe youre entente,
But now, Aurelius, I know your intention,
By thilke God that yaf me soule and lyf,
By that same God that gave me soul and life,
Ne shal I nevere been untrewe wyf
I shall never be an untrue wife
In word ne werk, as fer as I have wit;
In word nor deed, so long as I have my wits;
I wol been his to whom that I am knyt.
I will be his to whom that I am knit.
Taak this for fynal answere as of me."
Take this for my final answer."
But after that in pley thus seyde she:
But after that in play thus she said:
"Aurelie," quod she, "by heighe God above,
"Aurelius," she said, "by high God above,
Yet wolde I graunte yow to been youre love,
Yet would I grant you to be your love,
Syn I yow se so pitously complayne.
Since I see you so piteously lament.
Looke what day that endelong Britayne
On whatever day that from end to end of Brittany
Ye remoeve alle the rokkes, stoon by stoon,
You remove all the rocks, stone by stone,
That they ne lette ship ne boot to goon --
So that they do not prevent ship nor boat to go --
I seye, whan ye han maad the coost so clene
I say, when you have made the coast so clean
Of rokkes that ther nys no stoon ysene,
Of rocks that there is no stone seen,
Thanne wol I love yow best of any man;
Then will I love you best of any man;
Have heer my trouthe, in al that evere I kan."
Have here my pledged word, in all that is in my power."
"Is ther noon oother grace in yow?" quod he.
"Is there no other grace in you?" he said.
"No, by that Lord," quod she, "that maked me!
"No, by that Lord," she said, "that made me!
For wel I woot that it shal never bityde.
For well I know that it shall never happen.
Lat swiche folies out of youre herte slyde.
Let such follies pass out of your heart.
What deyntee sholde a man han in his lyf
What pleasure should a man have in his life
For to go love another mannes wyf,
To go love another man's wife,
That hath hir body whan so that hym liketh?"
Who has her body whenever he pleases?"
Aurelius ful ofte soore siketh;
Aurelius very often bitterly sighs;
Wo was Aurelie whan that he this herde,
Woe was Aurelius when he heard this,
And with a sorweful herte he thus answerde:
And with a sorrowful heart he thus answered:
"Madame," quod he, "this were an inpossible!
"Madame," he said, "this would be an impossiblity!
Thanne moot I dye of sodeyn deth horrible."
Then I must die of sudden horrible death."
And with that word he turned hym anon.
And with that word he turned away immediately.
Tho coome hir othere freendes many oon,
Then came her other friends many a one,
And in the aleyes romeden up and doun,
And in the garden paths roamed up and down,
And nothyng wiste of this conclusioun,
And knew nothing of this business,
But sodeynly bigonne revel newe
But suddenly began to revel anew
Til that the brighte sonne loste his hewe;
Until the bright sun lost its hue;
For th' orisonte hath reft the sonne his lyght --
For the horizon has bereft the sun of its light --
This is as muche to seye as it was nyght --
This is as much to say that it was night --
And hoom they goon in joye and in solas,
And home they go in joy and in pleasure,
Save oonly wrecche Aurelius, allas!
Save only wretched Aurelius, alas!
He to his hous is goon with sorweful herte.
He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart.
He seeth he may nat fro his deeth asterte;
He sees he can not escape from his death;
Hym semed that he felte his herte colde.
He thought that he felt his heart grow cold.
Up to the hevene his handes he gan holde,
Up to the heaven his hands he did hold,
And on his knowes bare he sette hym doun,
And on his bare knees he set himself down,
And in his ravyng seyde his orisoun.
And in his delirium said his prayer.
For verray wo out of his wit he breyde.
For utter woe out of his wits he suddenly went.
He nyste what he spak, but thus he seyde;
He knew not what he spoke, but thus he said;
With pitous herte his pleynt hath he bigonne
With piteous heart he has begun his complaint
Unto the goddes, and first unto the sonne:
Unto the gods, and first unto the sun:
He seyde, "Appollo, god and governour
He said, "Apollo, god and governor
Of every plaunte, herbe, tree, and flour,
Of every plant, herb, tree, and flower,
That yevest, after thy declinacion,
That gives, according to thy height (in the sky),
To ech of hem his tyme and his seson,
To each of them its time and its season,
As thyn herberwe chaungeth lowe or heighe,
As thy astronomical position changes low or high,
Lord Phebus, cast thy merciable eighe
Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciful eye
On wrecche Aurelie, which that am but lorn.
On wretched Aurelius, who is as good as lost.
Lo, lord! My lady hath my deeth ysworn
Lo, lord! My lady has sworn my death
Withoute gilt, but thy benignytee
Without guilt, unless thy kindness
Upon my dedly herte have som pitee.
Upon my dying heart have some pity.
For wel I woot, lord Phebus, if yow lest,
For well I know, lord Phoebus, if you wish,
Ye may me helpen, save my lady, best.
You can help me best (of anyone), except for my lady.
Now voucheth sauf that I may yow devyse
Now grant that I may tell you
How that I may been holpen and in what wyse.
How I may be helped and in what manner.
"Youre blisful suster, Lucina the sheene,
"Your blissful sister, Lucina the bright,
That of the see is chief goddesse and queene
Who of the sea is chief goddess and queen
(Though Neptunus have deitee in the see,
(Though Neptune have godly dominion in the sea,
Yet emperisse aboven hym is she),
Yet empress above him is she),
Ye knowen wel, lord, that right as hir desir
You know well, lord, that just as her desire
Is to be quyked and lighted of youre fir,
Is to be kindled and ignited by your fire,
For which she folweth yow ful bisily,
For which she follows you very attentively,
Right so the see desireth naturelly
Just so the sea desires naturally
To folwen hire, as she that is goddesse
To follow her, as she that is goddess
Bothe in the see and ryveres moore and lesse.
Both in the sea and rivers great and small.
Wherfore, lord Phebus, this is my requeste --
Wherefore, lord Phoebus, this is my request --
Do this miracle, or do myn herte breste --
Do this miracle, or make my heart break --
That now next at this opposicion
That now at this next opposition (of the sun and moon)
Which in the signe shal be of the Leon,
Which shall be in the sign of the Lion,
As preieth hire so greet a flood to brynge
Pray her so great a high tide to bring
That fyve fadme at the leeste it oversprynge
That five fathoms at the least it rise above
The hyeste rokke in Armorik Briteyne;
The highest rock in Armorican Brittany;
And lat this flood endure yeres tweyne.
And let this flood-tide endure for two years.
Thanne certes to my lady may I seye,
Then certainly to my lady may I say,
`Holdeth youre heste, the rokkes been aweye.'
`Keep your promise, the rocks are away.'
"Lord Phebus, dooth this miracle for me.
"Lord Phoebus, do this miracle for me.
Preye hire she go no faster cours than ye;
Pray her that she go at no faster speed as you;
I seye, preyeth your suster that she go
I say, pray your sister that she go
No faster cours than ye thise yeres two.
At no faster speed as you for these two years.
Thanne shal she been evene atte fulle alway,
Then shall she be fully even with you always,
And spryng flood laste bothe nyght and day.
And spring flood will last both night and day.
And but she vouche sauf in swich manere
And unless she agree in such manner
To graunte me my sovereyn lady deere,
To grant me my sovereign lady dear,
Prey hire to synken every rok adoun
Pray her to sink every rock down
Into hir owene dirke regioun
Into her own dark region
Under the ground, ther Pluto dwelleth inne,
Under the ground, in which Pluto dwells,
Or nevere mo shal I my lady wynne.
Or never more shall I win my lady.
Thy temple in Delphos wol I barefoot seke.
Thy temple in Delphi I will barefoot seek.
Lord Phebus, se the teeris on my cheke,
Lord Phoebus, see the tears on my cheek,
And of my peyne have som compassioun."
And on my pain have some compassion."
And with that word in swowne he fil adoun,
And with that word he fell down in a faint,
And longe tyme he lay forth in a traunce.
And for a long time he lay in a trance.
His brother, which that knew of his penaunce,
His brother, who knew of his suffering,
Up caughte hym and to bedde he hath hym broght.
Caught him up and to bed he has him brought.
Dispeyred in this torment and this thoght
Despaired in this torment and this thought
Lete I this woful creature lye;
I leave this woeful creature lying;
Chese he, for me, wheither he wol lyve or dye.
Let him choose, for all I care, whether he will live or die.
Arveragus, with heele and greet honour,
Arveragus, with well-being and great honor,
As he that was of chivalrie the flour,
As he that was of chivalry the flower,
Is comen hoom, and othere worthy men.
Is come home, and other worthy men.
O blisful artow now, thou Dorigen,
O blissful art thou now, thou Dorigen,
That hast thy lusty housbonde in thyne armes,
That hast thy lusty husband in thine arms,
The fresshe knyght, the worthy man of armes,
The vigorous knight, the worthy man of arms,
That loveth thee as his owene hertes lyf.
That loves thee as his own heart's life.
No thyng list hym to been ymaginatyf,
He not at all desired to be suspicious,
If any wight hadde spoke, whil he was oute,
If any person had spoken, while he was away,
To hire of love; he hadde of it no doute.
To her of love; he had of it no fear.
He noght entendeth to no swich mateere,
He pays no attention to any such matter,
But daunceth, justeth, maketh hire good cheere;
But dances, jousts, makes her good cheer;
And thus in joye and blisse I lete hem dwelle,
And thus in joy and bliss I let them dwell,
And of the sike Aurelius wol I telle.
And of the sick Aurelius I will tell.
In langour and in torment furyus
In suffering and in hellish torment
Two yeer and moore lay wrecche Aurelyus,
Two years and more lay wretched Aurelius,
Er any foot he myghte on erthe gon;
Before he could set a foot on the ground;
Ne confort in this tyme hadde he noon,
Nor had he any comfort in this time,
Save of his brother, which that was a clerk.
Except from his brother, who was a clerk.
He knew of al this wo and al this werk,
He knew of all this woe and all this suffering,
For to noon oother creature, certeyn,
For to no other creature, certainly,
Of this matere he dorste no word seyn.
He dared say any word of this matter.
Under his brest he baar it moore secree
Under his breast he bore it more secretly
Than evere dide Pamphilus for Galathee.
Than ever did Pamphilus for Galathee.
His brest was hool, withoute for to sene,
His breast was unhurt, in outward appearance,
But in his herte ay was the arwe kene.
But in his heart ever was the sharp arrow.
And wel ye knowe that of a sursanure
And well you know that for a wound healed only on the surface
In surgerye is perilous the cure,
In surgery the treatment is perilous,
But men myghte touche the arwe or come therby.
Unless one could touch the arrow or grasp it.
His brother weep and wayled pryvely,
His brother wept and wailed secretly,
Til atte laste hym fil in remembraunce,
Until at the last he remembered,
That whiles he was at Orliens in Fraunce --
That while he was at Orleans in France --
As yonge clerkes that been lykerous
As young clerks that are eager
To reden artes that been curious
To read arts that are arcane
Seken in every halke and every herne
Seek in every nook and every cranny
Particuler sciences for to lerne --
To learn specialized branches of learning --
He hym remembred that, upon a day,
He remembered that, one day,
At Orliens in studie a book he say
At Orleans in a study hall he saw a book
Of magyk natureel, which his felawe,
Of natural science, which his fellow,
That was that tyme a bacheler of lawe,
Who was at that time a bachelor of law,
Al were he ther to lerne another craft,
Although he was there to learn another craft,
Hadde prively upon his desk ylaft;
Had covertly left upon his desk;
Which book spak muchel of the operaciouns
Which book spoke much of the operations
Touchynge the eighte and twenty mansiouns
Concerning the eight and twenty stations
That longen to the moone, and swich folye
That belong to the moon, and such folly
As in oure dayes is nat worth a flye --
As in our days is not worth a fly --
For hooly chirches feith in oure bileve
For holy church's faith in our belief
Ne suffreth noon illusioun us to greve.
Does not allow any illusion to grieve us.
And whan this book was in his remembraunce,
And when this book was in his remembrance,
Anon for joye his herte gan to daunce,
Straightway for joy his heart began to dance,
And to hymself he seyde pryvely:
And to himself he said secretly,
"My brother shal be warisshed hastily;
"My brother shall be cured speedily;
For I am siker that ther be sciences
For I am sure that there are sciences
By whiche men make diverse apparences,
By which men make diverse illusions,
Swiche as thise subtile tregetoures pleye.
Such as these subtle illusionists play.
For ofte at feestes have I wel herd seye
For often at feasts have I well heard say
That tregetours withinne an halle large
That illusionists within a large hall
Have maad come in a water and a barge,
Have made come in a water and a barge,
And in the halle rowen up and doun.
And in the hall row up and down.
Somtyme hath semed come a grym leoun;
Sometimes a grim lion has seemed to come;
And somtyme floures sprynge as in a mede;
And sometimes flowers spring as in a field;
Somtyme a vyne, and grapes white and rede;
Sometimes a vine, and grapes white and red;
Somtyme a castel, al of lym and stoon;
Sometimes a castle, all of mortar and stone;
And whan hem lyked, voyded it anon.
And when they pleased, they made it suddenly disappear.
Thus semed it to every mannes sighte.
Thus it seemed to every man's sight.
"Now thanne conclude I thus: that if I myghte
"Now then conclude I thus: that if I might
At Orliens som oold felawe yfynde
At Orleans find some old fellow
That hadde thise moones mansions in mynde,
Who had these moon's stations in mind,
Or oother magyk natureel above,
Or other natural science beyond that
He sholde wel make my brother han his love.
He should well make my brother have his love.
For with an apparence a clerk may make,
For with an apparition a clerk may make it seem,
To mannes sighte, that alle the rokkes blake
To man's sight, that all the rocks black
Of Britaigne weren yvoyded everichon,
Of Brittany were removed every one,
And shippes by the brynke comen and gon,
And ships by the shore come and go,
And in swich forme enduren a wowke or two.
And in such form endure a week or two.
Thanne were my brother warisshed of his wo;
Then my brother would be cured of his woe;
Thanne moste she nedes holden hire biheste,
Then must she by necessity keep her promise,
Or elles he shal shame hire atte leeste."
Or else he shall shame her at the least."
What sholde I make a lenger tale of this?
Why should I make a longer tale of this?
Unto his brotheres bed he comen is,
Unto his brother's bed he is come,
And swich confort he yaf hym for to gon
And such encouragement he gave him to go
To Orliens that he up stirte anon,
To Orleans that he leaped up immediately,
And on his wey forthward thanne is he fare
And on his way forth then is he gone
In hope for to been lissed of his care.
In hope to be relieved of his care.
Whan they were come almoost to that citee,
When they had come almost to that city,
But if it were a two furlong or thre,
Not more than two or three furlongs,
A yong clerk romynge by hymself they mette,
A young clerk roaming by himself they met,
Which that in Latyn thriftily hem grette,
Who in Latin politely greeted them,
And after that he seyde a wonder thyng:
And after that he said a wonderful thing:
"I knowe," quod he, "the cause of youre comyng."
"I know," he said, "the cause of your coming."
And er they ferther any foote wente,
And before they went any foot farther,
He tolde hem al that was in hire entente.
He told them all that was in their intention.
This Briton clerk hym asked of felawes
This Breton clerk asked him about fellows
The whiche that he had knowe in olde dawes,
Whom he had known in old days,
And he answerde hym that they dede were,
And he answered him that they were dead,
For which he weep ful ofte many a teere.
For which he wept very often many a tear.
Doun of his hors Aurelius lighte anon,
Down off his horse Aurelius alighted straightway,
And with this magicien forth is he gon
And with this magician forth he is gone
Hoom to his hous, and maden hem wel at ese.
Home to his house, and put them well at ease.
Hem lakked no vitaille that myghte hem plese.
They lacked no foods that might please them.
So wel arrayed hous as ther was oon
So well appointed a house as this one was
Aurelius in his lyf saugh nevere noon.
Aurelius in his life saw never a one.
He shewed hym, er he wente to sopeer,
He showed him, before he went to supper,
Forestes, parkes ful of wilde deer;
Forests, parks full of wild deer;
Ther saugh he hertes with hir hornes hye,
There he saw harts with their high horns,
The gretteste that evere were seyn with ye.
The greatest that ever were seen with eye.
He saugh of hem an hondred slayn with houndes,
He saw a hundred of them slain by hounds,
And somme with arwes blede of bittre woundes.
And some bled because of bitter wounds from arrows.
He saugh, whan voyded were thise wilde deer,
He saw, when these wild deer were removed,
Thise fauconers upon a fair ryver,
These hunters with falcons upon a fair riverbank,
That with hir haukes han the heron slayn.
That with their hawks have slain the heron.
Tho saugh he knyghtes justyng in a playn;
Then he saw knights jousting in a plain;
And after this he dide hym swich plesaunce
And after this he provided him such pleasure
That he hym shewed his lady on a daunce,
That he showed him his lady in a dance,
On which hymself he daunced, as hym thoughte.
In which he himself danced, as he thought.
And whan this maister that this magyk wroughte
And when this master that wrought this magic
Saugh it was tyme, he clapte his handes two,
Saw it was time, he clapped his two hands,
And farewel! Al oure revel was ago.
And farewell! All our revel was gone.
And yet remoeved they nevere out of the hous,
And yet moved they never out of the house,
Whil they saugh al this sighte merveillous,
While they saw all this marvelous sight,
But in his studie, ther as his bookes be,
But in his study, where his books are,
They seten stille, and no wight but they thre.
They sat still, and no person (was there) but these three.
To hym this maister called his squier,
This master called his squire to him,
And seyde hym thus: "Is redy oure soper?
And said to him thus: "Is our supper ready?
Almoost an houre it is, I undertake,
Almost an hour it is, I declare,
Sith I yow bad oure soper for to make,
Since I ordered you to make our supper,
Whan that thise worthy men wenten with me
When these worthy men went with me
Into my studie, ther as my bookes be."
Into my study, where my books are."
"Sire," quod this squier, "whan it liketh yow,
"Sir," said this squire, "when it pleases you,
It is al redy, though ye wol right now."
It is all ready, even if you want it right now."
"Go we thanne soupe," quod he, "as for the beste.
"Go we then to sup," said he, "as is the best (to do).
Thise amorous folk somtyme moote han hir reste."
These amorous folk sometime must have their rest."
At after-soper fille they in tretee
At after-supper they began to discuss
What somme sholde this maistres gerdon be
What sum this master's payment should be
To remoeven alle the rokkes of Britayne,
To remove all the rocks of Brittany,
And eek from Gerounde to the mouth of Sayne.
And also from Gironde to the mouth of Seine.
He made it straunge, and swoor, so God hym save,
He raised difficulties, and swore, as God may him save,
Lasse than a thousand pound he wolde nat have,
Less than a thousand pounds he would not have,
Ne gladly for that somme he wolde nat goon.
Nor would he go gladly even for that sum.
Aurelius, with blisful herte anoon,
Aurelius, with blissful heart, at once
Answerde thus: "Fy on a thousand pound!
Answered thus: "Fie on a thousand pounds!
This wyde world, which that men seye is round,
This wide world, which men say is round,
I wolde it yeve, if I were lord of it.
I would give it, if I were lord of it.
This bargayn is ful dryve, for we been knyt.
This bargain is fully concluded, for we are agreed.
Ye shal be payed trewely, by my trouthe!
You shall be paid truly, by my pledged word!
But looketh now, for no necligence or slouthe
But look now, for no negligence or laziness
Ye tarie us heere no lenger than to-morwe."
You delay us here any longer than to-morrow."
"Nay," quod this clerk, "have heer my feith to borwe."
"Nay," said this clerk, "have here my faith as a pledge."
To bedde is goon Aurelius whan hym leste,
To bed is gone Aurelius when it pleased him,
And wel ny al that nyght he hadde his reste.
And well nigh all that night he had his rest.
What for his labour and his hope of blisse,
What for his labor and his hope of bliss,
His woful herte of penaunce hadde a lisse.
His woeful heart of suffering had relief.
Upon the morwe, whan that it was day,
Upon the morrow, when it was day,
To Britaigne tooke they the righte way,
To Brittany took they the direct route,
Aurelius and this magicien bisyde,
Aurelius and this magician beside him,
And been descended ther they wolde abyde.
And are arrived where they would stay.
And this was, as thise bookes me remembre,
And this was, as these books remind me,
The colde, frosty seson of Decembre.
The cold, frosty season of December.
Phebus wax old, and hewed lyk laton,
Phoebus grew old, and colored grayish silver,
That in his hoote declynacion
That in his hot declination (in summer)
Shoon as the burned gold with stremes brighte;
Shone like burnished gold with bright rays;
But now in Capricorn adoun he lighte,
But now in Capricorn he alights down,
Where as he shoon ful pale, I dar wel seyn.
Where he shone full pale, I dare well say.
The bittre frostes, with the sleet and reyn,
The bitter frosts, with the sleet and rain,
Destroyed hath the grene in every yerd.
Have destroyed the green in every garden.
Janus sit by the fyr, with double berd,
Janus sits by the fire, with double beard,
And drynketh of his bugle horn the wyn;
And drinks the wine from his buffalo horn;
Biforn hym stant brawen of the tusked swyn,
Before him stands meat of the tusked boar,
And "Nowel" crieth every lusty man.
And "Noel" cries every lusty man.
Aurelius in al that evere he kan
Aurelius in all that ever he can
Dooth to this maister chiere and reverence,
Provides for this master entertainment and reverence,
And preyeth hym to doon his diligence
And prays him to work diligently
To bryngen hym out of his peynes smerte,
To bring him out of his bitter pains,
Or with a swerd that he wolde slitte his herte.
Or with a sword he would slit his heart.
This subtil clerk swich routhe had of this man
This subtle clerk had such pity for this man
That nyght and day he spedde hym that he kan
That night and day he worked as fast as he can
To wayten a tyme of his conclusioun;
To seek a time for his astronomical operation;
This is to seye, to maken illusioun,
This is to say, to make illusion,
By swich an apparence or jogelrye --
By such an appearance or conjurer's trick --
I ne kan no termes of astrologye --
I know no technical terms of astrology --
That she and every wight sholde wene and seye
That she and every person should believe and say
That of Britaigne the rokkes were aweye,
That the rocks of Brittany were away,
Or ellis they were sonken under grounde.
Or else they were sunk under ground.
So atte laste he hath his tyme yfounde
So at the last he has his time found
To maken his japes and his wrecchednesse
To make his tricks and his wretched deeds
Of swich a supersticious cursednesse.
Of such a superstitious cursedness.
His tables Tolletanes forth he brought,
His astronomical tables of Toledo he brought forth,
Ful wel corrected, ne ther lakked nought,
Accurately corrected, nor was there anything lacking,
Neither his collect ne his expans yeeris,
Neither his tables of single years nor of twenty-year periods,
Ne his rootes, ne his othere geeris,
Nor his dates for calculations, nor his other apparatus,
As been his centris and his argumentz
Such as are his table of distances and his angles for calculation
And his proporcioneles convenientz
And his table for computing motions (of the planets)
For his equacions in every thyng.
For his divisions of the sphere in every detail.
And by his eighte speere in his wirkyng
And by his eighth sphere in his working
He knew ful wel how fer Alnath was shove
He knew full well how far the star Alnath was shoved
Fro the heed of thilke fixe Aries above,
From the head of that fixed Aries above,
That in the ninthe speere considered is;
That in the ninth sphere is observed;
Ful subtilly he kalkuled al this.
Full subtly he calculated all this.
Whan he hadde founde his firste mansioun,
When he had found his first position of the moon,
He knew the remenaunt by proporcioun,
He knew the remnant by astronomical tables,
And knew the arisyng of his moone weel,
And knew the arising of his moon well,
And in whos face, and terme, and everydeel;
And in which planet's face and term (zodiacal divisions), and everything;
And knew ful weel the moones mansioun
And knew full well the moon's position
Acordaunt to his operacioun,
In accordance with his operation,
And knew also his othere observaunces
And knew also his other observations
For swiche illusiouns and swiche meschaunces
For such illusions and such evil practices
As hethen folk useden in thilke dayes.
As heathen folk used in those days.
For which no lenger maked he delayes,
For which no longer he made delay,
But thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye,
But through his magic, for a week or two,
It semed that alle the rokkes were aweye.
It seemed that all the rocks were away.
Aurelius, which that yet despeired is
Aurelius, who is yet in despair
Wher he shal han his love or fare amys,
Whether he shall have his love or fare badly,
Awaiteth nyght and day on this myracle;
Waits night and day for this miracle;
And whan he knew that ther was noon obstacle,
And when he knew that there was no obstacle,
That voyded were thise rokkes everychon,
That every one of these rocks were removed,
Doun to his maistres feet he fil anon,
Down to his mistress' feet he fell at once,
And seyde, "I woful wrecche, Aurelius,
And said, "I woeful wretched, Aurelius,
Thanke yow, lord, and lady myn Venus,
Thank you, lord, and my lady Venus,
That me han holpen fro my cares colde."
Who have helped me out of my deadly cares."
And to the temple his wey forth hath he holde,
And to the temple he has held forth his way,
Where as he knew he sholde his lady see.
Where he knew he should see his lady.
And whan he saugh his tyme, anon-right hee,
And when he saw his time, immediately he,
With dredful herte and with ful humble cheere,
With fearful heart and with full humble manner,
Salewed hath his sovereyn lady deere:
Has saluted his sovereign lady dear:
"My righte lady," quod this woful man,
"My true lady," said this woeful man,
"Whom I moost drede and love as I best kan,
"Whom I most dread and love as I best know how,
And lothest were of al this world displese,
And am of all this world most reluctant to displease,
Nere it that I for yow have swich disese
Were it not that I for you have such distress
That I moste dyen heere at youre foot anon,
That I must die here at your feet right now,
Noght wolde I telle how me is wo bigon.
I would tell nothing of how I am beset by woe.
But certes outher moste I dye or pleyne;
But certainly either I must die or complain;
Ye sle me giltelees for verray peyne.
You slay me guiltless for sheer pain.
But of my deeth thogh that ye have no routhe,
But though you have no pity on my death,
Avyseth yow er that ye breke youre trouthe.
Think carefully before you break your pledged word.
Repenteth yow, for thilke God above,
Repent, for that God above,
Er ye me sleen by cause that I yow love.
Before you slay me because I love you.
For, madame, wel ye woot what ye han hight --
For, madam, you know well what you have promised --
Nat that I chalange any thyng of right
Not that I claim any thing as a right
Of yow, my sovereyn lady, but youre grace --
From you, my sovereign lady, except for your good favor --
But in a gardyn yond, at swich a place,
But in a garden yonder, at a particular place,
Ye woot right wel what ye bihighten me;
You know right well what you promised me;
And in myn hand youre trouthe plighten ye
And in my hand you pledged your word
To love me best -- God woot, ye seyde so,
To love me best -- God knows, you said so,
Al be that I unworthy am therto.
Although I am unworthy of it.
Madame, I speke it for the honour of yow
Madam, I speak it for your honor
Moore than to save myn hertes lyf right now --
More than to save my heart's life right now --
I have do so as ye comanded me;
I have done as you commanded me;
And if ye vouche sauf, ye may go see.
And if you agree, you may go see.
Dooth as yow list; have youre biheste in mynde,
Do as you please; have your promise in mind,
For, quyk or deed, right there ye shal me fynde.
For, living or dead, right there you shall find me.
In yow lith al to do me lyve or deye --
In you lies the power to make me live or die --
But wel I woot the rokkes been aweye."
But well I know the rocks are away."
He taketh his leve, and she astoned stood;
He takes his leave, and she astounded stood;
In al hir face nas a drope of blood.
In all her face was not a drop of blood.
She wende nevere han come in swich a trappe.
She never expected to have come in such a trap.
"Allas," quod she, "that evere this sholde happe!
"Alas," she said, "that ever this should happen!
For wende I nevere by possibilitee
For I never supposed by possibility
That swich a monstre or merveille myghte be!
That such a wonder or marvel could be!
It is agayns the proces of nature."
It is against the laws of nature."
And hoom she goth a sorweful creature;
And home she goes a sorrowful creature;
For verray feere unnethe may she go.
For sheer fear she can hardly walk.
She wepeth, wailleth, al a day or two,
She weeps, wails, all one day or two,
And swowneth, that it routhe was to see.
And swoons, that it was pitiful to see.
But why it was to no wight tolde shee,
But why it was she told to no person,
For out of towne was goon Arveragus.
For Arveragus had gone out of town.
But to hirself she spak, and seyde thus,
But to herself she spoke, and said thus,
With face pale and with ful sorweful cheere,
With face pale and with full sorrowful manner,
In hire compleynt, as ye shal after heere:
In her complaint, as you shall after hear:
"Allas," quod she, "on thee, Fortune, I pleyne,
"Alas," said she, "on thee, Fortune, I complain,
That unwar wrapped hast me in thy cheyne,
That without warning hast wrapped me in thy chain,
Fro which t' escape woot I no socour,
From which to escape I know no help,
Save oonly deeth or elles dishonour;
Save only death or else dishonor;
Oon of thise two bihoveth me to chese.
One of these two I am compelled to choose.
But nathelees, yet have I levere to lese
But neverthelees, yet I would rather lose
My lif than of my body to have a shame,
My life than of my body to have a shame,
Or knowe myselven fals, or lese my name;
Or know myself false, or lose my good name;
And with my deth I may be quyt, ywis.
And with my death I may be free from blame, indeed.
Hath ther nat many a noble wyf er this,
Has there not many a noble wife before this,
And many a mayde, yslayn hirself, allas,
And many a maid, slain herself, alas,
Rather than with hir body doon trespas?
Rather than do sin with her body?
"Yis, certes, lo, thise stories beren witnesse:
"Yes indeed, certainly, lo, these stories bear witness:
Whan thritty tirauntz, ful of cursednesse,
When thirty tyrants, full of cursedness,
Hadde slayn Phidon in Atthenes atte feste,
Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,
They comanded his doghtres for t' areste
They commanded (the guards) to seize his daughters
And bryngen hem biforn hem in despit,
And bring them before them as an insult,
Al naked, to fulfille hir foul delit,
All naked, to fulfill their foul delight,
And in hir fadres blood they made hem daunce
And in their father's blood they made them dance
Upon the pavement, God yeve hem meschaunce!
Upon the pavement, God give them misfortune!
For which thise woful maydens, ful of drede,
For which these woeful maidens, full of dread,
Rather than they wolde lese hir maydenhede,
Rather than they would lose their maidenhood,
They prively been stirt into a welle
They secretly have leaped into a well
And dreynte hemselven, as the bookes telle.
And drowned themselves, as the books tell.
"They of Mecene leete enquere and seke
"They of Messene had (people) search out and seek
Of Lacedomye fifty maydens eke,
Fifty maidens of Sparta also,
On whiche they wolden doon hir lecherye.
On whom they would do their lechery.
But was ther noon of al that compaignye
But there was none of all that company
That she nas slayn, and with a good entente
That she was not slain, and with a good intent
Chees rather for to dye than assente
Chose rather to die than assent
To been oppressed of hir maydenhede.
To be deprived of her maidenhood.
Why sholde I thanne to dye been in drede?
Why should I then be afraid to die?
Lo, eek, the tiraunt Aristoclides,
Lo, also, the tyrant Aristoclides,
That loved a mayden, heet Stymphalides,
That loved a maiden, called Stymphalides,
Whan that hir fader slayn was on a nyght,
When her father was slain on a night,
Unto Dianes temple goth she right,
Unto Diana's temple she goes directly,
And hente the ymage in hir handes two,
And seized the statue in her two hands,
Fro which ymage wolde she nevere go.
From which statue she would never go.
No wight ne myghte hir handes of it arace
No person could pull her hands away from it
Til she was slayn, right in the selve place.
Until she was slain, right in the same place.
"Now sith that maydens hadden swich despit
"Now since maidens had such disdain
To been defouled with mannes foul delit,
To be defiled by man's foul delight,
Wel oghte a wyf rather hirselven slee
Well ought a wife rather herself slay
Than be defouled, as it thynketh me.
Than be defiled, as it seems to me.
What shal I seyn of Hasdrubales wyf,
What shall I say of Hasdrubale's wife,
That at Cartage birafte hirself hir lyf?
That at Carthage deprived herself of her life?
For whan she saugh that Romayns wan the toun,
For when she saw that Romans won the town,
She took hir children alle, and skipte adoun
She took her children all, and leaped down
Into the fyr, and chees rather to dye
Into the fire, and chose rather to die
Than any Romayn dide hire vileynye.
Than any Roman did her a dishonor.
Hath nat Lucresse yslayn hirself, allas,
Has not Lucretia slain herself, alas,
At Rome, whan that she oppressed was
At Rome, when she was raped
Of Tarquyn, for hire thoughte it was a shame
By Tarquin, for she thought it was a shame
To lyven whan she hadde lost hir name?
To live when she had lost her good name?
The sevene maydens of Milesie also
The seven maidens of Miletus also
Han slayn hemself, for verrey drede and wo,
Have slain themselves, for sheer dread and woe,
Rather than folk of Gawle hem sholde oppresse.
Rather than folk of Galatia should rape them.
Mo than a thousand stories, as I gesse,
More than a thousand stories, as I guess,
Koude I now telle as touchynge this mateere.
Could I now tell concerning this matter.
Whan Habradate was slayn, his wyf so deere
When Habradate was slain, his wife so dear
Hirselven slow, and leet hir blood to glyde
Herself slew, and let her blood pour
In Habradates woundes depe and wyde,
In Habradate's wounds deep and wide,
And seyde, `My body, at the leeste way,
And said, `My body, at the least,
Ther shal no wight defoulen, if I may."
There shall no person defile, if I can (help it)."
"What sholde I mo ensamples heerof sayn,
"Why should I tell more examples concerning this,
Sith that so manye han hemselven slayn
Since so many have themselves slain
Wel rather than they wolde defouled be?
Well rather than they would be defiled?
I wol conclude that it is bet for me
I will conclude that it is better for me
To sleen myself than been defouled thus.
To slay myself than be defiled thus.
I wol be trewe unto Arveragus,
I will be true unto Arveragus,
Or rather sleen myself in som manere,
Or rather slay myself in some manner,
As dide Demociones doghter deere
As did Demotion's daughter dear
By cause that she wolde nat defouled be.
Because she would not defiled be.
O Cedasus, it is ful greet pitee
O Scedasus, it is a very great pity
To reden how thy doghtren deyde, allas,
To read how thy daughters died, alas,
That slowe hemself for swich manere cas.
Who slew themselves for a similar sort of cause.
As greet a pitee was it, or wel moore,
As great a pity was it, or well more,
The Theban mayden that for Nichanore
The Theban maiden that for Nichanore
Hirselven slow, right for swich manere wo.
Slew herself, exactly for such sort of woe.
Another Theban mayden dide right so;
Another Theban maiden did exactly the same;
For oon of Macidonye hadde hire oppressed,
Because one of Macedonia had raped her,
She with hire deeth hir maydenhede redressed.
She with her death avenged her maidenhood.
What shal I seye of Nicerates wyf,
What shall I say of Nicerates' wife,
That for swich cas birafte hirself hir lyf?
That for a similar case deprived herself of her life?
How trewe eek was to Alcebiades
How true also to Alcebiades was
His love, that rather for to dyen chees
His lover, who chose rather to die
Than for to suffre his body unburyed be.
Than to allow his body to be unburied.
Lo, which a wyf was Alceste," quod she.
Lo, what a wife was Alcestis," she said.
"What seith Omer of goode Penalopee?
"What says Homer of good Penelope?
Al Grece knoweth of hire chastitee.
All Greece knows of her chastity.
Pardee, of Laodomya is writen thus,
By God, of Laodomia is written thus,
That whan at Troie was slayn Protheselaus,
That when at Troy Protheselaus was slain,
Ne lenger wolde she lyve after his day.
No longer would she live after his day (i.e., death).
The same of noble Porcia telle I may;
The same of noble Portia I can tell;
Withoute Brutus koude she nat lyve,
Without Brutus she could not live,
To whom she hadde al hool hir herte yive.
To whom she had entirely given her heart.
The parfit wyfhod of Arthemesie
The perfect wifehood of Arthemesie
Honured is thurgh al the Barbarie.
Honored is through all heathendom.
O Teuta, queene, thy wyfly chastitee
O Teuta, queen, thy wifely chastity
To alle wyves may a mirour bee.
To all wives may be a mirror.
The same thyng I seye of Bilyea,
The same thing I say of Bilia,
Of Rodogone, and eek Valeria."
Of Rhodogune, and also Valeria."
Thus pleyned Dorigen a day or tweye,
Thus Dorigen complained a day or two,
Purposynge evere that she wolde deye.
Intending ever that she would die.
But nathelees, upon the thridde nyght,
But neverthelees, upon the third night,
Hoom cam Arveragus, this worthy knyght,
Home came Arveragus, this worthy knight,
And asked hire why that she weep so soore;
And asked her why she wept so bitterly;
And she gan wepen ever lenger the moore.
And she began to weep, ever the longer (she wept) the more (she wept) .
"Allas," quod she, "that evere was I born!
"Alas," said she, "that ever I was born!
Thus have I seyd," quod she, "thus have I sworn" --
Thus have I said," said she, "thus have I sworn" --
And toold hym al as ye han herd bifore;
And told him all as you have heard before;
It nedeth nat reherce it yow namoore.
There is no need to repeat it to you any more.
This housbonde, with glad chiere, in freendly wyse
This husband, with cheerful demeanor, in a friendly manner
Answerde and seyde as I shal yow devyse:
Answered and said as I shall tell you:
"Is ther oght elles, Dorigen, but this?"
"Is there anything else, Dorigen, but this?"
"Nay, nay," quod she, "God helpe me so as wys!
"Nay, nay," she said, "So help me God!
This is to muche, and it were Goddes wille."
This is too much, even if it were God's will."
"Ye, wyf," quod he, "lat slepen that is stille.
"Yes, wife," he said, "let sleep that which is still.
It may be wel, paraventure, yet to day.
It may be well, perhaps, yet to day.
Ye shul youre trouthe holden, by my fay!
You shall keep your pledged word, by my faith!
For God so wisly have mercy upon me,
For as surely as God may have mercy upon me,
I hadde wel levere ystiked for to be
I had well rather be stabbed
For verray love which that I to yow have,
For sheer love which I to have for you,
But if ye sholde youre trouthe kepe and save.
Than you should (do anything but) keep and save your pledged word.
Trouthe is the hyeste thyng that man may kepe" --
One's pldged word is the highest thing that one may keep" --
But with that word he brast anon to wepe,
But with that word he immediately burst into tears,
And seyde, "I yow forbede, up peyne of deeth,
And said, "I you forbid, upon pain of death,
That nevere, whil thee lasteth lyf ne breeth,
That never, while thy life or breath lasts,
To no wight telle thou of this aventure --
Thou tell any person about this adventure --
As I may best, I wol my wo endure --
As I best can, I will my woe endure --
Ne make no contenance of hevynesse,
Nor make any outward appearance of sadness,
That folk of yow may demen harm or gesse."
That folk may believe or guess anything harmful concerning you."
And forth he cleped a squier and a mayde:
And forth he called a squire and a maid:
"Gooth forth anon with Dorigen," he sayde,
"Go forth right now with Dorigen," he said,
"And bryngeth hire to swich a place anon."
"And bring her to such a place quickly."
They take hir leve, and on hir wey they gon,
They take their leave, and on their way they go,
But they ne wiste why she thider wente.
But they knew not why she thither went.
He nolde no wight tellen his entente.
He would no person tell his intention.
Paraventure an heep of yow, ywis,
Perhaps a heap of you, indeed,
Wol holden hym a lewed man in this
Will consider him a foolish man in this
That he wol putte his wyf in jupartie.
That he will put his wife in jeopardy.
Herkneth the tale er ye upon hire crie.
Listen to the tale before you cry out about her.
She may have bettre fortune than yow semeth;
She may have better fortune than it seems to you;
And whan that ye han herd the tale, demeth.
And when you have heard the tale, judge.
This squier, which that highte Aurelius,
This squire, who was called Aurelius,
On Dorigen that was so amorus,
On Dorigen who was so amorous,
Of aventure happed hire to meete
By chance happened to meet her
Amydde the toun, right in the quykkest strete,
Amidst the town, right in the busiest street,
As she was bown to goon the wey forth right
As she was about to go the way directly
Toward the gardyn ther as she had hight.
Toward the garden where she had promised (to go).
And he was to the gardyn-ward also;
And he was going toward the garden also;
For wel he spyed whan she wolde go
For well he spied when she would go
Out of hir hous to any maner place.
Out of her house to any sort of place.
But thus they mette, of aventure or grace,
But thus they met, by chance or luck,
And he saleweth hire with glad entente,
And he salutes her cheerfully,
And asked of hire whiderward she wente;
And asked her where she went;
And she answerde, half as she were mad,
And she answered, as if she were half mad,
"Unto the gardyn, as myn housbonde bad,
"Unto the garden, as my husband commanded,
My trouthe for to holde -- allas, allas!"
My pledged word to keep -- alas, alas!"
Aurelius gan wondren on this cas,
Aurelius began to wonder about this case,
And in his herte hadde greet compassioun
And in his heart had great compassion
Of hire and of hire lamentacioun,
Of her and of her lamentation,
And of Arveragus, the worthy knyght,
And of Arveragus, the worthy knight,
That bad hire holden al that she had hight,
Who commanded her to keep all that she had promised,
So looth hym was his wyf sholde breke hir trouthe;
So hateful to him it was that his wife should break her word;
And in his herte he caughte of this greet routhe,
And in his heart he took great pity on this,
Considerynge the beste on every syde,
Considering what would be best in every respect,
That fro his lust yet were hym levere abyde
That he would rather yet refrain from his desire
Than doon so heigh a cherlyssh wrecchednesse
Than do so great a churlish despicable act
Agayns franchise and alle gentillesse;
Against generosity and all nobility of character;
For which in fewe wordes seyde he thus:
For which in few words he said thus:
"Madame, seyth to youre lord Arveragus
"Madam, say to your lord Arveragus
That sith I se his grete gentillesse
That since I see his great graciousness
To yow, and eek I se wel youre distresse,
To you, and also I see well your distress,
That him were levere han shame (and that were routhe)
That he would rather have shame (and that would be a pity)
Than ye to me sholde breke thus youre trouthe,
Than you should thus break your pledged word to me,
I have wel levere evere to suffre wo
I would well rather suffer woe always
Than I departe the love bitwix yow two.
Than I should break apart the love between you two.
I yow relesse, madame, into youre hond
I release you, madam, into your hand I return
Quyt every serement and every bond
Freely every pledge and every bond
That ye han maad to me as heerbiforn,
That you have made to me before now,
Sith thilke tyme which that ye were born.
Since that time when you were born.
My trouthe I plighte, I shal yow never repreve
I pledge my word, I shall never reprove you
Of no biheste, and heere I take my leve,
For any promise, and here I take my leave,
As of the treweste and the beste wyf
Of the truest and the best wife
That evere yet I knew in al my lyf.
That ever yet I knew in all my life.
But every wyf be war of hire biheeste!
But let every wife beware of her promise!
On Dorigen remembreth, atte leeste.
Remember Dorigen, at the least.
Thus kan a squier doon a gentil dede
Thus can a squire do a gentle deed
As wel as kan a knyght, withouten drede."
As well as can a knight, without doubt."
She thonketh hym upon hir knees al bare,
She thanks him upon her bare knees,
And hoom unto hir housbonde is she fare,
And home unto her husband she is gone,
And tolde hym al, as ye han herd me sayd;
And told him all, as you have heard me say;
And be ye siker, he was so weel apayd
And be you sure, he was so well pleased
That it were impossible me to wryte.
That it would be impossible for me to write.
What sholde I lenger of this cas endyte?
Why should I write longer about this matter?
Arveragus and Dorigen his wyf
Arveragus and Dorigen his wife
In sovereyn blisse leden forth hir lyf.
In perfect bliss lead forth their life.
Nevere eft ne was ther angre hem bitwene.
Never again was there any anger between them.
He cherisseth hire as though she were a queene,
He cherishes her as though she were a queen,
And she was to hym trewe for everemoore.
And she was to him true for evermore.
Of thise two folk ye gete of me namoore.
Of these two folk you get of me no more.
Aurelius, that his cost hath al forlorn,
Aurelius, that all his expenditure has forfeited,
Curseth the tyme that evere he was born:
Curses the time that ever he was born:
"Allas!" quod he. "Allas, that I bihighte
"Alas!" said he. "Alas, that I promised
Of pured gold a thousand pound of wighte
Of refined gold a thousand pounds of weight
Unto this philosophre! How shal I do?
Unto this scientist! What shall I do?
I se namoore but that I am fordo.
I see no more but that I am ruined.
Myn heritage moot I nedes selle,
My heritage I must of necessity sell,
And been a beggere; heere may I nat dwelle
And be a beggar; here I may not remain
And shamen al my kynrede in this place,
And shame all my kin in this place,
But I of hym may gete bettre grace.
Unless I can get a better grace (favor) from him.
But nathelees, I wole of hym assaye,
But nonetheless, I will try him, (offering)
At certeyn dayes, yeer by yeer, to paye,
At specific days, year by year, to pay,
And thanke hym of his grete curteisye.
And thank him for his great courtesy.
My trouthe wol I kepe, I wol nat lye."
My word I will keep, I will not lie."
With herte soor he gooth unto his cofre,
With a sore heart he goes unto his money box,
And broghte gold unto this philosophre,
And brought gold unto this scientist,
The value of fyve hundred pound, I gesse,
The value of five hundred pounds, I guess,
And hym bisecheth, of his gentillesse,
And him beseeches, of his nobleness,
To graunte hym dayes of the remenaunt;
To grant him days (on which to pay) the remnant;
And seyde, "Maister, I dar wel make avaunt,
And said, "Master, I dare well make boast,
I failled nevere of my trouthe as yit.
I failed never of my pledged word as yet.
For sikerly my dette shal be quyt
For surely my debt shall be repaid
Towardes yow, howevere that I fare
To you, even though I have
To goon a-begged in my kirtle bare.
To go a-begging in my bare tunic.
But wolde ye vouche sauf, upon seuretee,
But if you would agree, upon my promise,
Two yeer or thre for to respiten me,
To grant me a respite for two years or three,
Thanne were I wel; for elles moot I selle
Then I would be well; for otherwise I must sell
Myn heritage; ther is namoore to telle."
My heritage; there is no more to tell."
This philosophre sobrely answerde,
This scientist soberly answered,
And seyde thus, whan he thise wordes herde:
And said thus, when he heard these words:
"Have I nat holden covenant unto thee?"
"Have I not kept my agreement with thee?"
"Yes, certes, wel and trewely," quod he.
"Yes, certainly, well and truly," said he.
"Hastow nat had thy lady as thee liketh?"
"Hast thou not had thy lady as it pleases thee?"
"No, no," quod he, and sorwefully he siketh.
"No, no," said he, and sorrowfully he sighs.
"What was the cause? Tel me if thou kan."
"What was the cause? Tel me if thou know how."
Aurelius his tale anon bigan,
Aurelius his tale immediately began,
And tolde hym al, as ye han herd bifoore;
And told him all, as you have heard before;
It nedeth nat to yow reherce it moore.
There is no need to repeat it to you again.
He seide, "Arveragus, of gentillesse,
He said, "Arveragus, of his nobility,
Hadde levere dye in sorwe and in distresse
Had rather die in sorrow and in distress
Than that his wyf were of hir trouthe fals."
Than that his wife would be false of her pledged word."
The sorwe of Dorigen he tolde hym als;
The sorrow of Dorigen he told him also;
How looth hire was to been a wikked wyf,
How loathfull to her it was to be a wicked wife,
And that she levere had lost that day hir lyf,
And that she would rather have lost her life that day,
And that hir trouthe she swoor thurgh innocence,
And that her word she swore through ignorance,
She nevere erst hadde herde speke of apparence.
She never before had heard tell of illusion.
"That made me han of hire so greet pitee;
"That made me have for her such great pity;
And right as frely as he sente hire me,
And right as freely as he sent her to me,
As frely sente I hire to hym ageyn.
As freely I sent her to him again.
This al and som; ther is namoore to seyn."
This is the entire matter; there is no more to say."
This philosophre answerde, "Leeve brother,
This scientist answered, "Dear brother,
Everich of yow dide gentilly til oother.
Every one of you did nobly to the other.
Thou art a squier, and he is a knyght;
Thou art a squire, and he is a knight;
But God forbede, for his blisful myght,
But God forbid, for his blissful might,
But if a clerk koude doon a gentil dede
That a clerk could not do a gentle deed
As wel as any of yow, it is no drede!
As well as any of you, it is no doubt!
Sire, I releesse thee thy thousand pound,
Sir, I release thee from thy (debt of a) thousand pounds,
As thou right now were cropen out of the ground,
As if thou right now were crept out of the ground,
Ne nevere er now ne haddest knowen me.
Nor never before now had known me.
For, sire, I wol nat taken a peny of thee
For, sir, I will not take a penny from thee
For al my craft, ne noght for my travaille.
For all my craft, nor anything for my labor.
Thou hast ypayed wel for my vitaille.
Thou hast paid well for my living expenses.
It is ynogh, and farewel, have good day!"
It is enough, and farewell, have good day!"
And took his hors, and forth he goth his way.
And took his horse, and forth he goes his way.
Lordynges, this question, thanne, wol I aske now,
Gentlemen, this question, then, will I ask now,
Which was the mooste fre, as thynketh yow?
Which was the most free, as it seems to you?
Now telleth me, er that ye ferther wende.
Now tell me, before you farther go.
I kan namoore; my tale is at an ende.
I know no more; my tale is at an end.
