The Prologe of the Freres Tale.
The Prologue of the Friar's Tale.
This worthy lymytour, this noble Frere,
This worthy licensed beggar, this noble Friar
He made alwey a maner louryng chiere
He always made a kind of scowling face
Upon the Somonour, but for honestee
At the Summoner, but for propriety
No vileyns word as yet to hym spak he.
No churlish word as yet to him spoke he.
But atte laste he seyde unto the wyf,
"Dame," quod he, "God yeve yow right good lyf!
"My lady," said he, "God give you a right good life!
"My lady," said he, "God give you a right good life!
Ye han heer touched, also moot I thee,
You have here touched, as I may prosper,
In scole-matere greet difficultee.
On academic problems of great difficulty.
Ye han seyd muche thyng right wel, I seye;
You have said many things right well, I say;
But, dame, heere as we ryde by the weye,
But, my lady, here as we ride by the way,
Us nedeth nat to speken but of game,
We need not speak of anything but pleasant matters,
And lete auctoritees, on Goddes name,
And leave authoritative texts, in God's name,
To prechyng and to scoles of clergye.
To preaching and to the universities.
But if it lyke to this compaignye,
But if it pleases this company,
I wol yow of a somonour telle a game.
I will tell you an amusing tale about a summoner.
Pardee, ye may wel knowe by the name
By God, you can easily tell by the name
That of a somonour may no good be sayd;
That no good may be said of a summoner;
I praye that noon of you be yvele apayd.
I pray that none of you be displeased.
A somonour is a rennere up and doun
A summoner is a runner up and down
With mandementz for fornicacioun,
With summonses for fornication,
And is ybet at every townes ende."
And is beaten (and driven away) at every town's end."
Oure Hoost tho spak, "A, sire, ye sholde be hende
Our Host then spoke, "Ah, sir, you should be polite
And curteys, as a man of youre estaat;
And courteous, as (befits) a man of your rank;
In compaignye we wol have no debaat.
In this company we will have no arguments.
Telleth youre tale, and lat the Somonour be."
Tell your tale, and leave the Summoner alone."
"Nay," quod the Somonour, "lat hym seye to me
"Nay," said the Summoner, "let him say to me
What so hym list; whan it comth to my lot,
Whatever he pleases; when it comes to my turn,
By God, I shal hym quiten every grot.
By God, I shall pay him back every groat (fourpence).
I shal hym tellen which a greet honour
I shall tell him what a great honor
It is to be a flaterynge lymytour,
It is to be a flattering licensed beggar,
And of many another manere cryme
And of many another sort of crime
Which nedeth nat rehercen at this tyme;
Which need not be told at this time;
And his office I shal hym telle, ywis."
And how he does his job I shall tell him, indeed."
Oure Hoost answerde, "Pees, namoore of this!"
Our Host answered, "Quiet, no more of this!"
And after this he seyde unto the Frere,
And after this he said unto the Friar,
"Tel forth youre tale, leeve maister deere."
"Tell forth your tale, beloved master dear."
Heere bigynneth the Freres Tale
Here begins the Friar's Tale
Whilom ther was dwellynge in my contree
Once there was dwelling in my country
An erchedeken, a man of heigh degree,
An archdeacon, a man of high rank,
That boldely dide execucioun
That boldly carried out the law
In punysshynge of fornicacioun,
In punishment of fornication,
Of wicchecraft, and eek of bawderye,
Of witchcraft, and also of pandering,
Of diffamacioun, and avowtrye,
Of defamation of character, and adultery,
Of chirche reves, and of testamentz,
Of robbing churches, and of wills,
Of contractes and of lakke of sacramentz,
Of marriage contracts and of failure to take the sacraments,
Of usure, and of symonye also.
Of usury, and of simony also.
But certes, lecchours dide he grettest wo;
But certainly, to lechers did he the greatest woe;
They sholde syngen if that they were hent;
They had to sing out in pain if they were taken;
And smale tytheres weren foule yshent,
And those who paid less than full tithes were severely punished,
If any persoun wolde upon hem pleyne.
If any parson would complain about them.
Ther myghte asterte hym no pecunyal peyne.
There could escape him no monetary punishment (fine).
For smale tithes and for smal offrynge
For small tithes and for small offering
He made the peple pitously to synge,
He made the people piteously to sing out in pain,
For er the bisshop caughte hem with his hook,
For ere the bishop caught them with his crozier,
They weren in the erchedeknes book.
They were in the archdeacon's book.
Thanne hadde he, thurgh his jurisdiccioun,
Then had he, throughout his jurisdiction,
Power to doon on hem correccioun.
Power to have them punished.
He hadde a somonour redy to his hond;
He had a summoner ready at his hand;
A slyer boye nas noon in Engelond;
No one in England was a more clever rascal;
For subtilly he hadde his espiaille,
For deviously he had his network of spies,
That taughte hym wel wher that hym myghte availle.
That showed him well where there might be profit for him.
He koude spare of lecchours oon or two,
He could spare one or two of the lechers,
To techen hym to foure and twenty mo.
To direct him to four and twenty more.
For thogh this Somonour wood were as an hare,
For though this Summoner were mad as a hare,
To telle his harlotrye I wol nat spare;
To tell his wickedness I will not desist;
For we are out of his correccioun.
For we are exempt from his authority.
They han of us no jurisdiccioun,
They have over us no jurisdiction,
Ne nevere shullen, terme of alle hir lyves.
Nor never shall, until the end of all their lives.
"Peter! so been wommen of the styves,"
"By St. Peter! so are women of the brothels,"
Quod the Somonour, "yput out of oure cure!"
Said the Summoner, "put out of our jurisdiction!"
"Pees! with myschance and with mysaventure!"
"Quiet! with bad luck and with misfortune to you!"
Thus seyde oure Hoost, "and lat hym telle his tale.
Thus said our Host, "and let him tell his tale.
Now telleth forth, thogh that the Somonour gale;
Now tell forth, though the Summoner loudly complain;
Ne spareth nat, myn owene maister deere."
And tell everything, my own master dear."
This false theef, this somonour, quod the Frere,
This false thief, this summoner, said the Friar,
Hadde alwey bawdes redy to his hond,
Had always pimps as ready to his hand,
As any hauk to lure in Engelond,
As any hawk to come to the lure in England,
That tolde hym al the secree that they knewe,
Who told him all the secrets that they knew,
For hire acqueyntance was nat come of newe.
For their acquaintance was not come recently.
They weren his approwours prively.
They were secretly his agents.
He took hymself a greet profit therby;
He got himself a great profit in this way;
His maister knew nat alwey what he wan.
His master knew not always what he earned.
Withouten mandement a lewed man
Without an actual summons an ignorant man
He koude somne, on peyne of Cristes curs,
He could summon, on pain of excommunication,
And they were glade for to fille his purs
And they were glad to fill his purse
And make hym grete feestes atte nale.
And make him great feasts at the ale-house.
And right as Judas hadde purses smale,
And just as Judas had small amounts of the apostles' money,
And was a theef, right swich a theef was he;
And was a thief, exactly such a thief was he;
His maister hadde but half his duetee.
His master had but half the amount due to him.
He was, if I shal yeven hym his laude,
He was, if I shall give him his due praise,
A theef, and eek a somnour, and a baude.
A thief, and also a summoner, and a pimp.
He hadde eek wenches at his retenue,
He had also wenches in his employ,
That, wheither that sir Robert or sir Huwe,
That, whether sir Robert or sir Huwe,
Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoso that it were
Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoever it was
That lay by hem, they tolde it in his ere.
That lay by them, they told it in his ear.
Thus was the wenche and he of oon assent,
Thus were the wench and he in agreement,
And he wolde fecche a feyned mandement,
And he would fetch a forged court order,
And somne hem to chapitre bothe two,
And summon both of them to the archdeacon's court,
And pile the man, and lete the wenche go.
And rob the man, and let the wench go.
Thanne wolde he seye, "Freend, I shal for thy sake
Then would he say, "Friend, I shall for thy sake
Do striken hire out of oure lettres blake;
Have her stricken out of our records;
Thee thar namoore as in this cas travaille.
Thou need trouble thyself no more in this case.
I am thy freend, ther I thee may availle."
I am thy friend, where I can help thee."
Certeyn he knew of briberyes mo
Certainly he knew of more ways of stealing
Than possible is to telle in yeres two.
Than is possible to tell in two years.
For in this world nys dogge for the bowe
For in this world is no hunting dog
That kan an hurt deer from an hool yknowe
That can know a hurt deer from a whole one
Bet than this somnour knew a sly lecchour,
Better than this summoner knew a sly lecher,
Or an avowtier, or a paramour.
Or an adulterer, or a concubine.
And for that was the fruyt of al his rente,
And because that was the best part of all his income,
Therfore on it he sette al his entente.
Therefore on it he set all his intention.
And so bifel that ones on a day
And it so befell that once on a day
This somnour, evere waityng on his pray,
This summoner, ever lying in ambush for his prey,
Rood for to somne an old wydwe, a ribibe,
Rode to summon an old widow, an old crone,
Feynynge a cause, for he wolde brybe.
Pretending to have a case against her, for he wanted a bribe.
And happed that he saugh bifore hym ryde
And it happened that he saw before him ride
A gay yeman, under a forest syde.
A gay yeoman, alongside the edge of a forest.
A bowe he bar, and arwes brighte and kene;
A bow he bore, and arrows bright and keen;
He hadde upon a courtepy of grene,
He had upon him a short jacket of green,
An hat upon his heed with frenges blake.
A hat upon his head with fringes black.
"Sire," quod this somnour, "hayl, and wel atake!"
"Sir," said this summoner, "hail, and well met!"
"Welcome," quod he, "and every good felawe!
"Welcome," said he, "and every good fellow!
Wher rydestow, under this grene-wode shawe?"
Where ridest thou, alongside this green wood?"
Seyde this yeman, "Wiltow fer to day?"
Said this yeoman, "Wilt thou travel far today?"
This somnour hym answerde and seyde, "Nay;
This summoner him answered and said, "Nay;
Heere faste by," quod he, "is myn entente
Here close by," said he, "is my intention
To ryden, for to reysen up a rente
To ride, to collect a rent
That longeth to my lordes duetee."
That belongs to my lord's due income."
"Artow thanne a bailly?" "Ye," quod he.
"Art thou then a bailiff?" "Yes," said he.
He dorste nat, for verray filthe and shame
He dared not, for the true filth and shame
Seye that he was a somonour, for the name.
Of the name, say that he was a summoner.
"Depardieux," quod this yeman, "deere broother,
"By God," said this yeoman, "dear brother,
Thou art a bailly, and I am another.
Thou art a bailiff, and I am another.
I am unknowen as in this contree;
I am unknown in this country;
Of thyn aqueyntance I wolde praye thee,
Of thine acquaintance I would pray thee,
And eek of bretherhede, if that yow leste.
And also of brotherhood, if you wish.
I have gold and silver in my cheste;
I have gold and silver in my chest;
If that thee happe to comen in oure shire,
If thou happen to come in our shire,
Al shal be thyn, right as thou wolt desire."
All shall be thine, just as thou wilt desire."
"Grant mercy," quod this somonour, "by my feith!"
"Great thanks," said this summoner, "by my faith!"
Everych in ootheres hand his trouthe leith,
Each in other's hand pledges his troth,
For to be sworne bretheren til they deye.
To be sworn brothers until they die.
In daliance they ryden forth and pleye.
In pleasant conversation they ride forth and amuse themselves.
This somonour, which that was as ful of jangles
This summoner, who was as full of idle speech
As ful of venym been thise waryangles
As full of venom are these butcherbirds
And evere enqueryng upon every thyng,
And ever inquiring about every thing,
"Brother," quod he, "where is now youre dwellyng
"Brother," said he, "where is now your dwelling
Another day if that I sholde yow seche?"
If I should seek you another day?"
This yeman hym answerde in softe speche,
This yeoman him answered in gentle words,
"Brother," quod he, "fer in the north contree,
"Brother," said he, "far in the north country,
Whereas I hope som tyme I shal thee see.
Where I hope some time I shall thee see.
Er we departe, I shal thee so wel wisse
Ere we depart, I shall thee so well instruct
That of myn hous ne shaltow nevere mysse."
That thou shalt never miss my house."
"Now, brother," quod this somonour, "I yow preye,
"Now, brother," said this summoner, "I you pray,
Teche me, whil that we ryden by the weye,
Teach me, while we ride by the way,
Syn that ye been a baillif as am I,
Since you are a bailiff as am I,
Som subtiltee, and tel me feithfully
Some trickery, and tell me faithfully
In myn office how that I may moost wynne;
In my occupation how I may most profit;
And spareth nat for conscience ne synne,
And spare not for conscience nor sin,
But as my brother tel me, how do ye."
But as my brother tell me, how you do your business."
"Now, by my trouthe, brother deere," seyde he,
"Now, by my troth, brother dear," said he,
"As I shal tellen thee a feithful tale,
"I shall tell thee a true tale,
My wages been ful streite and ful smale.
My wages are very scanty and very small.
My lord is hard to me and daungerous,
My lord is hard to me and niggardly,
And myn office is ful laborous,
And my job is very hard work,
And therfore by extorcions I lyve.
And therefore by extortions I live.
For sothe, I take al that men wol me yive.
For truly, I take all that men will me give.
Algate, by sleyghte or by violence,
In every way, by trickery or by violence,
Fro yeer to yeer I wynne al my dispence.
From year to year I earn all my expenses.
I kan no bettre telle, feithfully."
I can no better tell, truthfully."
"Now certes," quod this Somonour, "so fare I.
"Now certainly," said this Summoner, "I do the same.
I spare nat to taken, God it woot,
I do not desist from taking anything, God knows,
But if it be to hevy or to hoot.
Unless it be too heavy or too hot.
What I may gete in conseil prively,
What I can get in private secretly,
No maner conscience of that have I.
No sort of pangs of conscience for that have I.
Nere myn extorcioun, I myghte nat lyven,
Were it not for my extortion, I could not live,
Ne of swiche japes wol I nat be shryven.
Nor of such tricks will I be confessed.
Stomak ne conscience ne knowe I noon;
Stomach (compassion) nor conscience know I none;
I shrewe thise shrifte-fadres everychoon.
I curse these confessors every one.
Wel be we met, by God and by Seint Jame!
Well are we met, by God and by Saint James!
But, leeve brother, tel me thanne thy name,"
But, dear brother, tell me then thy name,"
Quod this somonour. In this meene while
Said this summoner. Meanwhile
This yeman gan a litel for to smyle.
This yeoman began a little to smile.
"Brother," quod he, "wiltow that I thee telle?
"Brother," said he, "wilt thou that I thee tell?
I am a feend; my dwellyng is in helle,
I am a fiend; my dwelling is in hell,
And heere I ryde aboute my purchasyng,
And here I ride about on my acquisition of profits,
To wite wher men wol yeve me any thyng.
To know whether men will give me any thing.
My purchas is th'effect of al my rente.
What I acquire is the total of all my income.
Looke how thou rydest for the same entente,
Look how thou ridest for the same purpose,
To wynne good, thou rekkest nevere how;
To make a profit, thou carest never how;
Right so fare I, for ryde wolde I now
Right so do I, for I would ride now
Unto the worldes ende for a preye."
Unto the world's end for a prey."
"A!" quod this somonour, "benedicite! What sey ye?
"Ah!" said this summoner, "bless me! What say you?
I wende ye were a yeman trewely.
I supposed you were truly a yeoman.
Ye han a mannes shap as wel as I;
You have a man's shape as well as I;
Han ye a figure thanne determinat
Have you then a definite form
In helle, ther ye been in youre estat?"
In hell, where you are in your usual condition?"
"Nay, certeinly," quod he, "ther have we noon;
"Nay, certainly," said he, "there have we none;
But whan us liketh we kan take us oon,
But when we like we can take us one,
Or elles make yow seme we been shape;
Or else make it seem to you we are so shaped;
Somtyme lyk a man, or lyk an ape,
Sometimes like a man, or like an ape,
Or lyk an angel kan I ryde or go.
Or like an angel can I ride or walk about.
It is no wonder thyng thogh it be so;
It is no wonderful thing though it be so;
A lowsy jogelour kan deceyve thee,
A lousy conjurer can deceive thee,
And pardee, yet kan I moore craft than he."
And by God, yet I know more craft than he."
"Why," quod this somonour, "ryde ye thanne or goon
"Why," said this summoner, "ride you then or walk about
In sondry shap, and nat alwey in oon?"
In various shapes, and not always in one?"
"For we," quod he, "wol us swiche formes make
"Because we," said he, "will make us such forms
As moost able is oure preyes for to take."
As are most suitable for taking our prey."
"What maketh yow to han al this labour?"
"What makes you to have all this labor?"
"Ful many a cause, leeve sire somonour,"
"Very many a cause, dear sir summoner,"
Seyde this feend, "but alle thyng hath tyme.
Said this fiend, "but every thing has its time.
The day is short, and it is passed prime,
The day is short, and it is past nine a.m.,
And yet ne wan I nothyng in this day.
And yet I gained nothing in this day.
I wol entende to wynnyng, if I may,
I will concentrate on profit, if I may,
And nat entende oure wittes to declare.
And not attend to explaining our mental abilities.
For, brother myn, thy wit is al to bare
For, brother mine, thy wit is all too bare
To understonde, althogh I tolde hem thee.
To understand, even though I told them to thee.
But, for thou axest why labouren we --
But, since thou askest why labor we --
For somtyme we been Goddes instrumentz
For sometimes we are God's instruments
And meenes to doon his comandementz,
And means to do his commandments,
Whan that hym list, upon his creatures,
When he wishes, upon his creatures,
In divers art and in diverse figures.
In various methods and in various appearances.
Withouten hym we have no myght, certayn,
Without him we have no power, certainly,
If that hym list to stonden ther-agayn.
If he wishes to stand against us.
And somtyme, at oure prayere, han we leve
And sometimes, at our prayer, have we leave
Oonly the body and nat the soule greve;
Only the body and not the soul to grieve;
Witnesse on Job, whom that we diden wo.
Take the evidence of Job, to whom we did woe.
And somtyme han we myght of bothe two --
And sometimes have we power over both of the two --
This is to seyn, of soule and body eke.
This is to say, of soul and body as well.
And somtyme be we suffred for to seke
And sometimes we are allowed to harass
Upon a man and doon his soule unreste
A man and do his soul distress
And nat his body, and al is for the beste.
And not his body, and all is for the best.
Whan he withstandeth oure temptacioun,
When he withstands our temptation,
It is a cause of his savacioun,
It is a cause of his salvation,
Al be it that it was nat oure entente
Although it was not our intention
He sholde be sauf, but that we wolde hym hente.
He should be saved, but that we wanted to seize him.
And somtyme be we servant unto man,
And sometimes we are servants unto a man,
As to the erchebisshop Seint Dunstan,
As to the archbishop Saint Dunstan,
And to the apostles servant eek was I."
And to the apostles I was also a servant."
"Yet tel me," quod the somonour, "feithfully,
"Yet tell me," said the summoner, "truly,
Make ye yow newe bodies thus alway
Do you make yourself new bodies thus always
Of elementz?" The feend answerde, "Nay.
Of elements?" The fiend answered, "Nay.
Somtyme we feyne, and somtyme we aryse
Sometime we dissemble, and sometimes we arise
With dede bodyes, in ful sondry wyse,
With dead bodies, in very many manners,
And speke as renably and faire and wel
And speak as readily and faire and well
As to the Phitonissa dide Samuel.
As to the Phitonissa (Witch of Endor) did Samuel.
(And yet wol som men seye it was nat he;
(And yet will some men say it was not he;
I do no fors of youre dyvynytee.)
I put no store in your theology.)
But o thyng warne I thee, I wol nat jape:
But one thing I warn thee, I will not deceive you:
Thou wolt algates wite how we been shape;
Thou want especially to know how we are shaped;
Thou shalt herafterward, my brother deere,
Thou shalt hereafter, my brother dear,
Come there thee nedeth nat of me to leere,
Come where thou need not to learn from me,
For thou shalt, by thyn owene experience,
For thou shalt, by thine own experience,
Konne in a chayer rede of this sentence
Be able in a professorial chair to lecture on this subject
Bet than Virgile, while he was on lyve,
Better than Virgil, while he was alive,
Or Dant also. Now lat us ryde blyve,
Or Dante also. Now let us ride quickly,
For I wole holde compaignye with thee
For I will hold company with thee
Til it be so that thou forsake me."
Until it be that thou forsake me."
"Nay," quod this somonour, "that shal nat bityde!
"Nay," said this summoner, "that shall not happen!
I am a yeman, knowen is ful wyde;
I am a yeoman, as is very widely known;
My trouthe wol I holde, as in this cas.
My troth will I keep, in this case.
For though thou were the devel Sathanas,
For though thou were the devil Satan,
My trouthe wol I holde to my brother,
My troth will I hold to my brother,
As I am sworn, and ech of us til oother,
As I am sworn, and each of us to the other,
For to be trewe brother in this cas;
To be true brother in this case;
And bothe we goon abouten oure purchas.
And we both go about our acquisitions.
Taak thou thy part, what that men wol thee yive,
Take thou thy part, whatever men will thee give,
And I shal myn; thus may we bothe lyve.
And I shall mine; thus may we both live.
And if that any of us have moore than oother,
And if one of us have more than the other,
Lat hym be trewe and parte it with his brother."
Let him be true and share it with his brother."
"I graunte," quod the devel, "by my fey."
"I grant," said the devil, "by my faith."
And with that word they ryden forth hir wey.
And with that word they ride forth their way.
And right at the entryng of the townes ende,
And right at the entrance of the town,
To which this somonour shoop hym for to wende,
To which this summoner planned to go
They saugh a cart that charged was with hey,
They saw a cart that was loaded with hay,
Which that a cartere droof forth in his wey.
Which a carter drove forth in his way.
Deep was the wey, for which the carte stood.
Deep in mud was the road, for which the cart stood still.
The cartere smoot and cryde as he were wood,
The carter smote and cried as if he were crazy,
"Hayt, Brok! Hayt, Scot! What spare ye for the stones?
"Giddap, Brok! Giddap, Scot! Why do you stop pulling for the stones?
The feend," quod he, "yow fecche, body and bones,
The fiend," said he, "fetch you, body and bones,
As ferforthly as evere were ye foled,
As surely as ever you were born,
So muche wo as I have with yow tholed!
So much woe as I have with you suffered!
The devel have al, bothe hors and cart and hey!"
The devil have all, both horses and cart and hay!"
This somonour seyde, "Heere shal we have a pley."
This summoner said, "Here shall we have some fun."
And neer the feend he drough, as noght ne were,
And nearer the fiend he drew, as if it were nothing,
Ful prively, and rowned in his ere:
Very discreetly, and whispered in his ear:
"Herkne, my brother, herkne, by thy feith!
"Hearken, my brother, hearken, by thy faith!
Herestow nat how that the cartere seith?
Hearest thou not what the carter says?
Hent it anon, for he hath yeve it thee,
Seize it at once, for he has given it to thee,
Bothe hey and cart, and eek his caples thre."
Both hay and cart, and also his three horses."
"Nay," quod the devel, "God woot, never a deel!
"Nay," said the devil, "God knows, never a bit!
It is nat his entente, trust me weel.
It is not his intention, trust me well.
Axe hym thyself, if thou nat trowest me;
Ask him thyself, if thou not believe me;
Or elles stynt a while, and thou shalt see."
Or else wait a while, and thou shalt see."
This cartere thakketh his hors upon the croupe,
This carter whacks his horses upon the hindquarters,
And they bigonne to drawen and to stoupe.
And they began to pull and to stoop.
"Heyt! Now," quod he, "ther Jhesu Crist yow blesse,
"Giddap! Now," said he, "may Jesus Christ you bless,
And al his handwerk, bothe moore and lesse!
And all his handiwork, both more and less!
That was wel twight, myn owene lyard boy.
That was well pulled, my own dappled boy.
I pray God save thee, and Seinte Loy!
I pray God save thee, and Saint Loy!
Now is my cart out of the slow, pardee!"
Now is my cart out of the mud, by God!"
"Lo, brother," quod the feend, "what tolde I thee?
"Lo, brother," said the fiend, "what told I thee?
Heere may ye se, myn owene deere brother,
Here may you see, my own dear brother,
The carl spak oo thing, but he thoghte another.
The churl spoke one thing, but he thought another.
Lat us go forth abouten oure viage;
Let us go forth on our undertaking;
Heere wynne I nothyng upon cariage."
Here gain I nothing from a tax on horse and cart."
Whan that they coomen somwhat out of towne,
When they came a short way out of town,
This somonour to his brother gan to rowne:
This summoner to his brother began to whisper:
"Brother," quod he, "heere woneth an old rebekke
"Brother," said he, "here dwells an old crone
That hadde almoost as lief to lese hire nekke
Who would be almost as willing to lose her neck
As for to yeve a peny of hir good.
As to give up a penny of her goods.
I wole han twelf pens, though that she be wood,
I will have twelve pence, even if she be driven mad,
Or I wol sompne hire unto oure office;
Or I will summon her unto our court;
And yet, God woot, of hire knowe I no vice.
And yet, God knows, of her know I no vice.
But for thou kanst nat, as in this contree,
But since thou can not, in this country,
Wynne thy cost, taak heer ensample of me."
Earn thy living, learn here by my example."
This somonour clappeth at the wydwes gate.
This summoner knocks at the widow's gate.
"Com out," quod he, "thou olde virytrate!
"Come out," said he, "thou old hag!
I trowe thou hast som frere or preest with thee."
I believe thou hast some friar or priest with thee."
"Who clappeth?" seyde this wyf, "benedicitee!
"Who knocks?" said this wife, "bless me!
God save you, sire, what is youre sweete wille?"
God save you, sir, what is your sweet will?"
"I have," quod he, "of somonce here a bille;
"I have," said he, "here a writ of summons;
Up peyne of cursyng, looke that thou be
Upon pain of excommunication, look that thou be
Tomorn bifore the erchedeknes knee
Tomorrow morning before the archdeacon's knee
T' answere to the court of certeyn thynges."
To answer to the court about certain things."
"Now, Lord," quod she, "Crist Jhesu, kyng of kynges,
"Now, Lord," said she, "Christ Jesus, king of kings,
So wisly helpe me, as I ne may.
Surely help me, since I can not.
I have been syk, and that ful many a day.
I have been sick, and that full many a day.
I may nat go so fer," quod she, "ne ryde,
I can not walk so far," said she, "nor ride,
But I be deed, so priketh it in my syde.
Without being dead, it so pains in my side.
May I nat axe a libel, sire somonour,
May I not ask for a written copy of the charge, sir summoner,
And answere there by my procuratour
And answer there by my representative
To swich thyng as men wole opposen me?"
To such thing as men will bring against me?"
"Yis," quod this somonour, "pay anon -- lat se --
"Yes," said this summoner, "pay at once -- let's see --
Twelf pens to me, and I wol thee acquite.
Twelve pens to me, and I will thee acquit.
I shal no profit han therby but lite;
I shall have no profit thereby but little;
My maister hath the profit and nat I.
My master has the profit and not I.
Com of, and lat me ryden hastily;
Hurry up, and let me ride hastily;
Yif me twelf pens, I may no lenger tarye."
Give me twelve pens, I can no longer tarry."
"Twelf pens!" quod she, "Now, lady Seinte Marie
"Twelve pence!" said she, "Now, lady Saint Marie
So wisly help me out of care and synne,
Surely help me out of care and sin,
This wyde world thogh that I sholde wynne,
Though I should gain this wide world (if I had it),
Ne have I nat twelf pens withinne myn hoold.
I have not twelve pence within my possession.
Ye knowen wel that I am povre and oold;
You know well that I am poor and old;
Kithe youre almesse on me, povre wrecche."
Show your charity on me, poor wretch."
"Nay thanne," quod he, "the foule feend me fecche
"Nay then," said he, "the foul fiend me fetch
If I th' excuse, though thou shul be spilt!"
If I excuse thee, though thou should be dead!"
"Allas!" quod she, "God woot, I have no gilt."
"Alas!" said she, "God knows, I have no guilt."
"Pay me," quod he, "or by the sweete Seinte Anne,
"Pay me," said he, "or by the sweet Saint Anne,
As I wol bere awey thy newe panne
I will carry off thy new pan
For dette which thou owest me of old.
For debt which thou owest me since long ago.
Whan that thou madest thyn housbonde cokewold,
When thou madest thine husband cuckold,
I payde at hoom for thy correccioun."
I paid at our court the fine for thy punishment."
"Thou lixt!" quod she, "by my savacioun,
"Thou lie!" said she, "by my salvation,
Ne was I nevere er now, wydwe ne wyf,
I was never ere now, widow nor wife,
Somoned unto youre court in al my lyf;
Summoned unto your court in all my life;
Ne nevere I nas but of my body trewe!
Nor was I ever anything but true of my body!
Unto the devel blak and rough of hewe
Unto the devil black and rough of appearance
Yeve I thy body and my panne also!"
Give I thy body and my pan also!"
And whan the devel herde hire cursen so
And when the devil heard her so curse
Upon hir knees, he seyde in this manere,
Upon her knees, he said in this manner,
"Now, Mabely, myn owene mooder deere,
"Now, Mabely, my own mother dear,
Is this youre wyl in ernest that ye seye?"
Is this your will in earnest that you say?"
"The devel," quod she, "so fecche hym er he deye,
"The devil," said she, "so fetch him ere he die,
And panne and al, but he wol hym repente!"
And pan and all, unless he will repent!"
"Nay, olde stot, that is nat myn entente,"
"Nay, old slut, that is not my intention,"
Quod this somonour, "for to repente me
Said this summoner, "to repent
For any thyng that I have had of thee.
For any thing that I have had of thee.
I wolde I hadde thy smok and every clooth!"
I would I had thy smock and every bit of your clothing!"
"Now, brother," quod the devel, "be nat wrooth;
"Now, brother," said the devil, "be not angry;
Thy body and this panne been myne by right.
Thy body and this pan are mine by right.
Thou shalt with me to helle yet tonyght,
Thou shalt go with me to hell yet tonight,
Where thou shalt knowen of oure privetee
Where thou shalt know of our secrets
Moore than a maister of dyvynytee."
More than a Master of Divinity."
And with that word this foule feend hym hente;
And with that word this foul fiend seized him;
Body and soule he with the devel wente
Body and soul he with the devil went
Where as that somonours han hir heritage.
Where summoners have their heritage.
And God, that maked after his ymage
And God, that made after his image
Mankynde, save and gyde us, alle and some,
Mankind, save and guide us, one and all,
And leve thise somonours goode men bicome!
And grant that these summoners become good men!
Lordynges, I koude han toold yow, quod this Frere,
Gentlemen, I could have told you, said this Friar,
Hadde I had leyser for this Somnour heere,
Had I had been given time by this Summoner here,
After the text of Crist, Poul, and John,
According to the text of Christ, Paul, and John,
And of oure othere doctours many oon,
And of our other doctors of the Church many a one,
Swiche peynes that youre hertes myghte agryse,
Such pains that your hearts might tremble,
Al be it so no tonge may it devyse,
Even though no tongue can describe it,
Thogh that I myghte a thousand wynter telle
Though I could for a thousand years tell
The peynes of thilke cursed hous of helle.
The pains of that cursed house of hell.
But for to kepe us fro that cursed place,
But to keep us from that cursed place,
Waketh and preyeth Jhesu for his grace
Keep vigil and pray Jesus for his grace
So kepe us fro the temptour Sathanas.
To protect us from the tempter Satan.
Herketh this word! Beth war, as in this cas:
Hearken this word! Beware, as in this case:
"The leoun sit in his awayt alway
"The lion sits in his ambush always
To sle the innocent, if that he may."
To slay the innocent, if he can."
Disposeth ay youre hertes to withstonde
Dispose always your hearts to withstand
The feend, that yow wolde make thral and bonde.
The fiend, who would make you thrall and enslaved.
He may nat tempte yow over youre myght,
He may not tempt you beyond your power,
For Crist wol be youre champion and knyght.
For Christ will be your champion and knight.
And prayeth that thise somonours hem repente
And pray that these summoners themselves repent
Of hir mysdedes, er that the feend hem hente!
Of their misdeeds, ere the fiend seize them!
Heere endeth the Freres Tale.
Here ends the Friar's Tale.
