The Prologe of the Marchantes Tale.
The Prologue of the Merchant's Tale.
"Wepyng and waylyng, care and oother sorwe
"Weeping and wailing, grief and other sorrow
I knowe ynogh, on even and a-morwe,"
I know enough, on evenings and mornings,"
Quod the Marchant, "and so doon other mo
Said the Merchant, "and so do many others
That wedded been. I trowe that it be so,
Who are wedded. I believe that it is so,
For wel I woot it fareth so with me.
For well I know it fares so with me.
I have a wyf, the worste that may be;
I have a wife, the worst that can be;
For thogh the feend to hire ycoupled were,
For though the fiend were married to her,
She wolde hym overmacche, I dar wel swere.
She would outmatch him, I dare well swear.
What sholde I yow reherce in special
Why should I tell you in detail
Hir hye malice? She is a shrewe at al.
Her high malice? She is a shrew in every way.
Ther is a long and large difference
There is a long and large difference
Bitwix Grisildis grete pacience
Between Griselda's great patience
And of my wyf the passyng crueltee.
And the extreme cruelty of my wife
Were I unbounden, also moot I thee,
Were I released (from marriage), so may I may prosper,
I wolde nevere eft comen in the snare.
I would never again come in the snare.
We wedded men lyven in sorwe and care.
We wedded men live in sorrow and care.
Assaye whoso wole, and he shal fynde
Try it whoso will, and he shall find
That I seye sooth, by Seint Thomas of Ynde,
That I say truth, by Saint Thomas of India,
As for the moore part -- I sey nat alle.
As for the greater part (majority) -- I say not all.
God shilde that it sholde so bifalle!
God prevent that it should so happen!
"A, goode sire Hoost, I have ywedded bee
"A, good sir Host, I have been wedded
Thise monthes two, and moore nat, pardee;
These two months, and no more, by God;
And yet, I trowe, he that al his lyve
And yet, I believe, he who all his life
Wyflees hath been, though that men wolde him ryve
Wifeless has been, though one would him stab
Unto the herte, ne koude in no manere
Unto the heart, could not in any way
Tellen so muchel sorwe as I now heere
Tell so much sorrow as I now here
Koude tellen of my wyves cursednesse!"
Could tell of my wife's cursedness!"
"Now," quod oure Hoost, "Marchaunt, so God yow blesse,
"Now," said our Host, "Merchant, as God may you bless,
Syn ye so muchel knowen of that art
Since you know so much of that art
Ful hertely I pray yow telle us part."
Full heartily I pray you tell us part."
"Gladly," quod he, "but of myn owene soore,
"Gladly," said he, "but of my own sorrow,
For soory herte, I telle may namoore."
For sorry heart, I can tell no more."
Heere bigynneth the Marchantes Tale.
Here begins the Merchant's Tale.
Whilom ther was dwellynge in Lumbardye
Once there was dwelling in Lombardy
A worthy knyght, that born was of Pavye,
A worthy knight, who was born in Pavia,
In which he lyved in greet prosperitee;
In which he lived in great prosperity;
And sixty yeer a wyflees man was hee,
And sixty years a wifeless man was he,
And folwed ay his bodily delyt
And followed always his bodily desire
On wommen, ther as was his appetyt,
On women, where was his appetite,
As doon thise fooles that been seculeer.
As do these fools that are secular.
And whan that he was passed sixty yeer,
And when he was passed sixty years,
Were it for hoolynesse or for dotage
Were it for holiness or for dotage
I kan nat seye, but swich a greet corage
I can not say, but such a great desire
Hadde this knyght to been a wedded man
Had this knight to be a wedded man
That day and nyght he dooth al that he kan
That day and night he does all he can
T' espien where he myghte wedded be,
To discover where he might wedded be,
Preyinge oure Lord to graunten him that he
Praying our Lord to grant him that he
Mighte ones knowe of thilke blisful lyf
Might once know of that blissful life
That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf,
That is between a husband and his wife,
And for to lyve under that hooly boond
And to live under that holy bond
With which that first God man and womman bond.
With which God first bound man and woman.
"Noon oother lyf," seyde he, "is worth a bene,
"No other life," said he, "is worth a bean,
For wedlok is so esy and so clene,
For wedlock is so easy and so pure,
That in this world it is a paradys."
That in this world it is a paradise."
Thus seyde this olde knyght, that was so wys.
Thus said this old knight, who was so wise.
And certeinly, as sooth as God is kyng,
And certainly, as truly as God is king,
To take a wyf it is a glorious thyng,
To take a wife it is a glorious thing,
And namely whan a man is oold and hoor;
And especially when a man is old and white-haired;
Thanne is a wyf the fruyt of his tresor.
Then is a wife the best part of his treasure.
Thanne sholde he take a yong wyf and a feir,
Then should he take a young wife and a fair,
On which he myghte engendren hym an heir,
On which he might engender himself an heir,
And lede his lyf in joye and in solas,
And lead his life in joy and in pleasure,
Where as thise bacheleris synge "allas,"
Whereas these bachelors sing "alas,"
Whan that they fynden any adversitee
When they find any adversity
In love, which nys but childyssh vanytee.
In love, which is nothing but childish vanity.
And trewely it sit wel to be so,
And truly it is fitting to be thus,
That bacheleris have often peyne and wo;
That bachelors have often pain and woe;
On brotel ground they buylde, and brotelnesse
On brittle ground they build, and insecurity
They fynde whan they wene sikernesse.
They find when they expect security.
They lyve but as a bryd or as a beest,
They live but as a bird or as a beast,
In libertee and under noon arreest,
In liberty and under no restraint,
Ther as a wedded man in his estaat
Whereas a wedded man in his estate
Lyveth a lyf blisful and ordinaat
Lives a blissful and orderly life
Under this yok of mariage ybounde.
Bound under this yoke of marriage.
Wel may his herte in joy and blisse habounde,
Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound,
For who kan be so buxom as a wyf?
For who can be so obedient as a wife?
Who is so trewe, and eek so ententyf
Who is so true, and also so eager
To kepe hym, syk and hool, as is his make?
To care for him, sick and well, as is his mate?
For wele or wo she wole hym nat forsake;
For happiness or woe she will not forsake him;
She nys nat wery hym to love and serve,
She is not weary of loving and serving him,
Though that he lye bedrede til he sterve.
Though he lie bedridden until he dies.
And yet somme clerkes seyn it nys nat so,
And yet some clerks say it is not so,
Of whiche he Theofraste is oon of tho.
Of which that Theofrastus is one of those.
What force though Theofraste liste lye?
What does it matter though Theofrastus wants to lie?
"Ne take no wyf," quod he, "for housbondrye,
"Take no wife," said he, "for managing the household,
As for to spare in houshold thy dispence.
As to economize in thy household expenditures.
A trewe servant dooth moore diligence
A true servant does more diligence
Thy good to kepe than thyn owene wyf,
To guard thy goods than thine own wife,
For she wol clayme half part al hir lyf.
For she will claim half part all her life.
And if thou be syk, so God me save,
And if thou be sick, as God may save me,
Thy verray freendes, or a trewe knave,
Thy real friends, or a true servant,
Wol kepe thee bet than she that waiteth ay
Will take care of thee better than she that waits always
After thy good and hath doon many a day.
To inherit thy goods and has done so many a day.
And if thou take a wyf unto thyn hoold
And if thou take a wife unto thy household
Ful lightly maystow been a cokewold."
Full easily canst thou be a cuckold."
This sentence, and an hundred thynges worse,
This opinion, and a hundred things worse,
Writeth this man, ther God his bones corse!
Writes this man, may God his bones curse!
But take no kep of al swich vanytee;
But take no heed of all such foolishness;
Deffie Theofraste, and herke me.
Defy Theofrastus, and listen to me.
A wyf is Goddes yifte verraily;
A wife is God's gift truly;
Alle othere manere yiftes hardily,
All other sorts of gifts certainly,
As londes, rentes, pasture, or commune,
Such as lands, rents, pasture, or right to use common land,
Or moebles -- alle been yiftes of Fortune
Or personal possessions -- all are gifts of Fortune
That passen as a shadwe upon a wal.
That pass like a shadow upon a wall.
But drede nat, if pleynly speke I shal:
But doubt not, if I shall speak plainly:
A wyf wol laste, and in thyn hous endure,
A wife will last, and in thy house endure,
Wel lenger than thee list, paraventure.
Well longer than thou will wish, indeed.
Mariage is a ful greet sacrement.
Marriage is a full great sacrament.
He which that hath no wyf, I holde hym shent;
He who has no wife, I consider him ruined;
He lyveth helplees and al desolat --
He lives helpless and all desolate --
I speke of folk in seculer estaat.
I speak of folk in secular life.
And herke why -- I sey nat this for noght --
And hearken why -- I say not this for nothing --
That womman is for mannes helpe ywroght.
That woman is created for man's help.
The hye God, whan he hadde Adam maked,
The high God, when he had made Adam,
And saugh him al allone, bely-naked,
And saw him all alone, stark naked,
God of his grete goodnesse seyde than,
God of his great goodness said then,
"Lat us now make an helpe unto this man
"Let us now make a helper for this man
Lyk to hymself"; and thanne he made him Eve.
Like to himself"; and then he made him Eve.
Heere may ye se, and heerby may ye preve,
Here can you see, and hereby can you prove,
That wyf is mannes helpe and his confort,
That wife is man's help and his comfort,
His paradys terrestre, and his disport.
His earthly paradise, and his source of consolation.
So buxom and so vertuous is she,
So obedient and so virtuous is she,
They moste nedes lyve in unitee.
They must necessarily live in unity.
O flessh they been, and o fleesh, as I gesse,
One flesh they are, and one flesh, as I guess,
Hath but oon herte, in wele and in distresse.
Has but one heart, in prosperity and in distress.
A wyf! a, Seinte Marie, benedicite!
A wife! A, Saint Mary, bless me!
How myghte a man han any adversitee
How could a man have any adversity
That hath a wyf? Certes, I kan nat seye.
That has a wife? Certainly, I can not say.
The blisse which that is bitwixe hem tweye
The bliss that is betwixt them two
Ther may no tonge telle, or herte thynke.
There can no tongue tell, nor heart think.
If he be povre, she helpeth hym to swynke;
If he be poor, she helps him to work;
She kepeth his good, and wasteth never a deel;
She keeps his goods, and wastes not a bit;
Al that hire housbonde lust, hire liketh weel;
All that her husband desires, well pleases her;
She seith nat ones "nay," whan he seith "ye."
She says not once "nay," when he says "yea."
"Do this," seith he; "Al redy, sire," seith she.
"Do this," says he; "All ready, sir," says she.
O blisful ordre of wedlok precious,
O blissful order of wedlock precious,
Thou art so murye, and eek so vertuous,
Thou art so merry, and also so virtuous,
And so commended and appreved eek
And so commended and approved also
That every man that halt hym worth a leek
That every man that considers himself worth a leek
Upon his bare knees oughte al his lyf
Upon his bare knees ought all his life
Thanken his God that hym hath sent a wyf,
To thank his God that has sent him a wife,
Or elles preye to God hym for to sende
Or else pray to God to send him
A wyf to laste unto his lyves ende.
A wife to last unto his life's end.
For thanne his lyf is set in sikernesse;
For then his life is set in security;
He may nat be deceyved, as I gesse,
He may not be deceived, as I guess,
So that he werke after his wyves reed.
Providing that he work according to his wife's advice.
Thanne may he boldely beren up his heed,
Then may he boldly bear up his head,
They been so trewe and therwithal so wyse;
They are so true and therewithal so wise;
For which, if thou wolt werken as the wyse,
For which, if thou will act like a wise man,
Do alwey so as wommen wol thee rede.
Do always as women will advise thee.
Lo, how that Jacob, as thise clerkes rede,
Lo, how Jacob, as these clerks tell,
By good conseil of his mooder Rebekke,
By good counsel of his mother Rebecca,
Boond the kydes skyn aboute his nekke,
Bound the kid's skin about his neck,
For which his fadres benyson he wan.
For which his father's blessing he won.
Lo Judith, as the storie eek telle kan,
Lo Judith, as the story also can tell,
By wys conseil she Goddes peple kepte,
By wise counsel she God's people kept,
And slow hym Olofernus, whil he slepte.
And slew that Holofernes, while he slept.
Lo Abigayl, by good conseil how she
Lo Abigail, by good counsel how she
Saved hir housbonde Nabal whan that he
Saved her husband Nabal when he
Sholde han be slayn; and looke, Ester also
Should have been slain; and look, Esther also
By good conseil delyvered out of wo
By good counsel delivered out of woe
The peple of God, and made hym Mardochee
The people of God, and made that same Mordecai
Of Assuere enhaunced for to be.
To be exalted by Ahasuerus.
Ther nys no thyng in gree superlatyf,
There is no thing superior (in degree of virtue),
As seith Senek, above an humble wyf.
As says Seneca, above a humble wife.
Suffre thy wyves tonge, as Catoun bit;
Submit to thy wife's tongue, as Cato bids;
She shal comande, and thou shalt suffren it,
She shall command, and thou shalt submit to it,
And yet she wole obeye of curteisye.
And yet she will (seem to) obey by way of courtesy.
A wyf is kepere of thyn housbondrye;
A wife is keeper of thy household;
Wel may the sike man biwaille and wepe,
Well may the sick man bewail and weep,
Ther as ther nys no wyf the hous to kepe.
Where there is no wife to keep the house.
I warne thee, if wisely thou wolt wirche,
I warn thee, if wisely thou wilt act,
Love wel thy wyf, as Crist loved his chirche.
Love well thy wife, as Christ loved his church.
If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wyf;
If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wife;
No man hateth his flessh, but in his lyf
No man hates his flesh, but in his life
He fostreth it, and therfore bidde I thee
He nurtures it, and therefore I bid thee
Cherisse thy wyf, or thou shalt nevere thee.
Cherish thy wife, or thou shalt never prosper.
Housbonde and wyf, what so men jape or pleye,
Husband and wife, however much men may jest or play,
Of worldly folk holden the siker weye;
Of worldly folk hold the secure way;
They been so knyt ther may noon harm bityde,
They are so knit together no harm can there befall,
And namely upon the wyves syde.
And especially upon the wife's side.
For which this Januarie, of whom I tolde,
For which this January, of whom I told,
Considered hath, inwith his dayes olde,
Considered has, in his old age,
The lusty lyf, the vertuous quyete,
The pleasing life, the virtuous quiet,
That is in mariage hony-sweete,
That is in honey-sweet marriage,
And for his freendes on a day he sente,
And for his friends on a day he sent,
To tellen hem th' effect of his entente.
To tell them the substance of his intention.
With face sad his tale he hath hem toold.
With serious face his tale he has them told.
He seyde, "Freendes, I am hoor and oold,
He said, "Friends, I am white-haired and old,
And almoost, God woot, on my pittes brynke;
And almost, God knows, on my grave's brink;
Upon my soule somwhat moste I thynke.
Upon my soul somewhat must I think.
I have my body folily despended;
I have my body foolishly wasted;
Blessed be God that it shal been amended!
Blessed be God that it shall be amended!
For I wol be, certeyn, a wedded man,
For I will be, certainly, a wedded man,
And that anoon in al the haste I kan.
And that at once in all the haste I can (do it).
Unto som mayde fair and tendre of age,
Unto some maid fair and tender of age,
I prey yow, shapeth for my mariage
I pray yow, prepare for my marriage
Al sodeynly, for I wol nat abyde;
Right away, for I will not delay;
And I wol fonde t' espien, on my syde,
And I will attempt to discover, on my side,
To whom I may be wedded hastily.
To whom I may be wedded hastily.
But forasmuche as ye been mo than I,
But forasmuch as you are more than I,
Ye shullen rather swich a thyng espyen
You shall rather such a thing discover
Than I, and where me best were to allyen.
Than I, and where it would be best to ally myself (marry).
"But o thyng warne I yow, my freendes deere,
"But one thing warn I you, my friends dear,
I wol noon oold wyf han in no manere.
I will no old wife have in any way.
She shal nat passe twenty yeer, certayn;
She shall not pass twenty years, certainly;
Oold fissh and yong flessh wolde I have fayn.
Old fish and young flesh would I gladly have.
Bet is," quod he, "a pyk than a pykerel,
Better is," said he, "a pike than a pickerel (young pike),
And bet than old boef is the tendre veel.
And better than old beef is the tender veal.
I wol no womman thritty yeer of age;
I want no woman thirty years of age;
It is but bene-straw and greet forage.
It is but dry bean-stalks and coarse fodder.
And eek thise olde wydwes, God it woot,
And also these old widows, God it knows,
They konne so muchel craft on Wades boot,
They know so much trickery on Wade's boat,
So muchel broken harm, whan that hem leste,
Do so much harm, when they please,
That with hem sholde I nevere lyve in reste.
That with them should I never live in rest.
For sondry scoles maken sotile clerkis;
For various schools make clever clerks;
Womman of manye scoles half a clerk is.
A woman of many schools is half a clerk.
But certeynly, a yong thyng may men gye,
But certainly, one can guide a young thing,
Right as men may warm wex with handes plye.
Just as one can mold warm wax with hands.
Wherfore I sey yow pleynly, in a clause,
Therefore I tell you plainly, in brief,
I wol noon oold wyf han right for this cause.
I will no old wife have at all for this reason.
For if so were I hadde swich myschaunce
For if it so were that I had such bad luck
That I in hire ne koude han no plesaunce,
That I in her could have no pleasure,
Thanne sholde I lede my lyf in avoutrye
Then I should lead my life in adultery
And go streight to the devel whan I dye.
And go straight to the devil when I die.
Ne children sholde I none upon hire geten;
Nor any children should I upon her beget;
Yet were me levere houndes had me eten
Yet I would rather hounds had eaten me
Than that myn heritage sholde falle
Than that my heritage should fall
In straunge hand, and this I telle yow alle.
In a stranger's hand, and this I tell you all.
I dote nat; I woot the cause why
I am not in my dotage; I know the cause why
Men sholde wedde, and forthermoore woot I
One should wed, and furthermore know I
Ther speketh many a man of mariage
There speaks many a man of marriage
That woot namoore of it than woot my page
Who knows no more of it than my servant boy knows
For whiche causes man sholde take a wyf.
For which causes man should take a wife.
If he ne may nat lyven chaast his lyf,
If he can not live his life chastely,
Take hym a wyf with greet devocioun,
Let him take him a wife with great devotion,
By cause of leveful procreacioun
For the sake of lawful procreation
Of children to th' onour of God above,
Of children to the honor of God above,
And nat oonly for paramour or love;
And not only for sexual passion or love;
And for they sholde leccherye eschue,
And so that they should abstain from lechery,
And yelde hir dette whan that it is due;
And yield their marital debt when it is due;
Or for that ech of hem sholde helpen oother
Or so that each of them should help the other
In meschief, as a suster shal the brother,
In distress, as a sister shall the brother,
And lyve in chastitee ful holily.
And live in celibacy full piously.
But sires, by youre leve, that am nat I.
But sirs, by your leave, that am not I.
For -- God be thanked! -- I dar make avaunt
For -- God be thanked! -- I dare make boast
I feele my lymes stark and suffisaunt
I feel my limbs strong and sufficient
To do al that a man bilongeth to;
To do all that is proper to a man;
I woot myselven best what I may do.
I know myself best what I can do.
Though I be hoor, I fare as dooth a tree
Though I be white-haired, I fare as does a tree
That blosmeth er that fruyt ywoxen bee;
That blossoms before the fruit is grown;
And blosmy tree nys neither drye ne deed.
And a blossom-filled tree is neither dry nor dead.
I feele me nowhere hoor but on myn heed;
I feel me nowhere white-haired but on my head;
Myn herte and alle my lymes been as grene
My heart and all my limbs are as green
As laurer thurgh the yeer is for to sene.
As laurel through the year is to be seen.
And syn that ye han herd al myn entente,
And since you have heard all my intention,
I prey yow to my wyl ye wole assente."
I pray you to my will you will assent."
Diverse men diversely hym tolde
Diverse men diversely him told
Of mariage manye ensamples olde.
Of marriage many old examples.
Somme blamed it, somme preysed it, certeyn,
Somme blamed it, some praised it, certainly,
But atte laste, shortly for to seyn,
But at the last, shortly to say,
As al day falleth altercacioun
As every day altercation occurs
Bitwixen freendes in disputisoun,
Between friends in disputation,
Ther fil a stryf bitwixe his bretheren two,
There befell a strife betwixt his two brothers,
Of whiche that oon was cleped Placebo;
Of whom that one was called Placebo;
Justinus soothly called was that oother.
Justinus truly was called that other.
Placebo seyde, "O Januarie, brother,
Placebo said, "O January, brother,
Ful litel nede hadde ye, my lord so deere,
Full little need had you, my lord so dear,
Conseil to axe of any that is heere,
To ask counsel of any that is here,
But that ye been so ful of sapience
Except that you are so full of wisdom
That yow ne liketh, for youre heighe prudence,
That it does not please you, for your high prudence,
To weyven fro the word of Salomon.
To deviate from the word of Solomon.
This word seyde he unto us everychon:
This word said he unto us every one:
`Wirk alle thyng by conseil,' thus seyde he,
`Do everything according to good advice,' thus said he,
`And thanne shaltow nat repente thee.'
`And then shalt thou not repent.'
But though that Salomon spak swich a word,
But though Solomon spoke such a word,
Myn owene deere brother and my lord,
My own dear brother and my lord,
So wysly God my soule brynge at reste,
As surely as God my soul may bring to rest,
I holde youre owene conseil is the beste.
I hold your own counsel is the best.
For, brother myn, of me taak this motyf:
For, brother mine, of me take this advice:
I have now been a court-man al my lyf,
I have now been a courtier all my life,
And God it woot, though I unworthy be,
And God it knows, though I am unworthy,
I have stonden in ful greet degree
I have stood in very high degree
Abouten lordes of ful heigh estaat;
Among lords of very high rank;
Yet hadde I nevere with noon of hem debaat.
Yet had I never with any of them disagreement.
I nevere hem contraried, trewely;
I never contradicted them, truly;
I woot wel that my lord kan moore than I.
I know well that my lord knows more than I.
What that he seith, I holde it ferme and stable;
What he says, I consider it unshakably true;
I seye the same, or elles thyng semblable.
I say the same, or else something similar.
A ful greet fool is any conseillour
A full great fool is any counselor
That serveth any lord of heigh honour,
That serves any lord of high honor,
That dar presume, or elles thenken it,
That dares presume, or else think it,
That his conseil sholde passe his lordes wit.
That his counsel should surpass his lord's judgment.
Nay, lordes been no fooles, by my fay!
Nay, lords are no fools, by my faith!
Ye han youreselven shewed heer to-day
You have yourselves showed here to-day
So heigh sentence, so holily and weel,
Such high good judgment, so piously and well,
That I consente and conferme everydeel
That I consent and confirm every bit
Youre wordes alle and youre opinioun.
All your words and your opinion.
By God, ther nys no man in al this toun,
By God, there is no man in all this town,
Ne in Ytaille, that koude bet han sayd!
Nor in Italy, that could have spoken better!
Crist halt hym of this conseil ful wel apayd.
Christ considers himself by this counsel very well pleased.
And trewely, it is an heigh corage
And truly, it is a bold act
Of any man that stapen is in age
By any man that is advanced in age
To take a yong wyf; by my fader kyn,
To take a young wife; by my father's kin,
Youre herte hangeth on a joly pyn!
Your heart hangs on a jolly pin (is very merry)!
Dooth now in this matiere right as yow leste,
Do now in this matter exactly as you please,
For finally I holde it for the beste."
For finally I consider it for the best."
Justinus, that ay stille sat and herde,
Justinus, that always still sat and listened,
Right in this wise he to Placebo answerde:
Right in this manner he to Placebo answered:
"Now, brother myn, be pacient, I preye,
"Now, brother mine, be patient, I pray,
Syn ye han seyd, and herkneth what I seye.
Since you have spoken, and hear what I say.
Senek, amonges othere wordes wyse,
Seneca, amongst other words wise,
Seith that a man oghte hym right wel avyse
Says that a man ought very carefully consider
To whom he yeveth his lond or his catel.
To whom he gives his land or his moveable possessions.
And syn I oghte avyse me right wel
And since I ought to consider very carefully
To whom I yeve my good awey fro me,
To whom I give my goods away from me,
Wel muchel moore I oghte avysed be
Well much more I ought to consider
To whom I yeve my body for alwey.
To whom I give my body for always.
I warne yow wel, it is no childes pley
I warn you well, it is no child's play
To take a wyf withouten avysement.
To take a wife without deliberation.
Men moste enquere -- this is myn assent --
One must inquire -- this is my opinion --
Wher she be wys, or sobre, or dronkelewe,
Whether she be wise, or sober, or given to drink,
Or proud, or elles ootherweys a shrewe,
Or proud, or else otherwise a shrew,
A chidestere, or wastour of thy good,
A scold, or waster of thy goods,
Or riche, or poore, or elles mannyssh wood.
Or rich, or poor, or else man-crazy.
Al be it so that no man fynden shal
Although it is so that no man shall find
Noon in this world that trotteth hool in al,
Any in this world that is perfect in everything,
Ne man, ne beest, swich as men koude devyse;
No man, nor beast, such as men could imagine;
But nathelees it oghte ynough suffise
But nevertheless it ought enough suffice
With any wyf, if so were that she hadde
With any wife, (to learn) if it so were that she had
Mo goode thewes than hire vices badde;
More good personal qualities than her bad vices;
And al this axeth leyser for t' enquere.
And all this requires leisure to find out.
For, God it woot, I have wept many a teere
For, God it knows, I have wept many a tear
Ful pryvely, syn I have had a wyf.
Full privately, since I have had a wife.
Preyse whoso wole a wedded mannes lyf,
Praise whosoever will a wedded man's life,
Certein I fynde in it but cost and care
Certainly I find in it nothing but cost and care
And observances, of alle blisses bare.
And duties, of all blisses bare.
And yet, God woot, my neighebores aboute,
And yet, God knows, my neighbors about,
And namely of wommen many a route,
And especially many a crowd of women,
Seyn that I have the mooste stedefast wyf,
Say that I have the most steadfast wife,
And eek the mekeste oon that bereth lyf;
And also the meekest one that bears life;
But I woot best where wryngeth me my sho.
But I know best where my shoe pinches me.
Ye mowe, for me, right as yow liketh do;
You may, for me, do just as you like;
Avyseth yow -- ye been a man of age --
Consider -- you are a man of advanced age --
How that ye entren into mariage,
How that you enter into marriage,
And namely with a yong wyf and a fair.
And especially with a young wife and a fair.
By hym that made water, erthe, and air,
By him that made water, earth, and air,
The yongeste man that is in al this route
The youngest man that is in all this company
Is bisy ynough to bryngen it aboute
Is busy enough to bring it about
To han his wyf allone. Trusteth me,
To have his wife alone. Trust me,
Ye shul nat plesen hire fully yeres thre --
You shall not please her fully years three --
This is to seyn, to doon hire ful plesaunce.
This is to say, to do her full pleasure.
A wyf axeth ful many an observaunce.
A wife requires constant attention.
I prey yow that ye be nat yvele apayd."
I pray you that you be not displeased."
"Wel," quod this Januarie, "and hastow ysayd?
"Well," said this January, "and hast thou spoken?
Straw for thy Senek, and for thy proverbes!
Straw for thy Seneca, and for thy proverbs!
I counte nat a panyer ful of herbes
I would not give a bread basket full of herbs
Of scole-termes. Wyser men than thow,
For academic talk. Wiser men than thou,
As thou hast herd, assenteden right now
As thou hast heard, assented right now
To my purpos. Placebo, what sey ye?"
To my purpose. Placebo, what say you?"
"I seye it is a cursed man," quod he,
"I say it is a cursed man," said he,
"That letteth matrimoigne, sikerly."
"That hinders matrimony, certainly."
And with that word they rysen sodeynly,
And with that word they rise immediately,
And been assented fully that he sholde
And are agreed fully that he should
Be wedded whanne hym liste and where he wolde.
Be wedded when he pleased and where he would.
Heigh fantasye and curious bisynesse
Exaggerated imagination and constant thought
Fro day to day gan in the soule impresse
From day to day became fixed in the soul
Of Januarie aboute his mariage.
Of January concerning his marriage.
Many fair shap and many a fair visage
Many a fair shape and many a fair visage
Ther passeth thurgh his herte nyght by nyght,
There passes through his heart night after night,
As whoso tooke a mirour, polisshed bryght,
As if one took a mirror, polished bright,
And sette it in a commune market-place,
And set it in a common market-place,
Thanne sholde he se ful many a figure pace
Then should he see full many a figure pace
By his mirour; and in the same wyse
By his mirror; and in the same manner
Gan Januarie inwith his thoght devyse
Did January within his thought imagine
Of maydens whiche that dwelten hym bisyde.
About maidens which dwelt nearby him.
He wiste nat wher that he myghte abyde.
He knew not on which he might settle.
For if that oon have beaute in hir face,
For if that one have beauty in her face,
Another stant so in the peples grace
Another stands so in the people's good opinion
For hire sadnesse and hire benyngnytee
For her seriousness and her goodness
That of the peple grettest voys hath she;
That of the people greatest praise has she;
And somme were riche and hadden badde name.
And some were rich and had a bad reputation.
But nathelees, bitwixe ernest and game,
But nevertheless, between earnestness and joking (in every way),
He atte laste apoynted hym on oon,
He at the last decided upon one,
And leet alle othere from his herte goon,
And let all others from his heart go,
And chees hire of his owene auctoritee;
And chose her by his own authority;
For love is blynd alday, and may nat see.
For love is blind always, and can not see.
And whan that he was in his bed ybroght,
And when he was in his bed brought,
He purtreyed in his herte and in his thoght
He portrayed in his heart and in his thought
Hir fresshe beautee and hir age tendre,
Her fresh beauty and her tender age,
Hir myddel smal, hire armes longe and sklendre,
Her small waist, her arms long and slender,
Hir wise governaunce, hir gentillesse,
Her wise self-control, her nobility,
Hir wommanly berynge, and hire sadnesse.
Her womanly bearing, and her seriousness.
And whan that he on hire was condescended,
And when he on her had decided,
Hym thoughte his choys myghte nat ben amended.
He thought his choice could not be bettered.
For whan that he hymself concluded hadde,
For when he himself had decided,
Hym thoughte ech oother mannes wit so badde
He thought each other man's wit so bad
That inpossible it were to repplye
That it would be impossible to reply
Agayn his choys; this was his fantasye.
Against his choice; this was his fantasy.
His freendes sente he to, at his instaunce,
His friends sent he to, at his request,
And preyed hem to doon hym that plesaunce,
And prayed them to do him that pleasure,
That hastily they wolden to hym come;
That hastily they would come to him;
He wolde abregge hir labour, alle and some.
He would abridge their labor, one and all.
Nedeth namoore for hym to go ne ryde;
He needs no more to travel about;
He was apoynted ther he wolde abyde.
He had decided on whom he would settle.
Placebo cam, and eek his freendes soone,
Placebo came, and also his friends quickly,
And alderfirst he bad hem alle a boone,
And first of all he asked them all a favor,
That noon of hem none argumentes make
That none of them make any arguments
Agayn the purpos which that he hath take,
Against the purpose which he has taken,
Which purpos was plesant to God, seyde he,
Which purpose was pleasing to God, said he,
And verray ground of his prosperitee.
And true ground of his prosperity.
He seyde ther was a mayden in the toun,
He said there was a maiden in the town,
Which that of beautee hadde greet renoun,
Who for beauty had great renown,
Al were it so she were of smal degree;
Even though she was of low rank;
Suffiseth hym hir yowthe and hir beautee.
Her youth and her beauty are enough for him .
Which mayde, he seyde, he wolde han to his wyf,
Which maid, he said, he would have as his wife,
To lede in ese and hoolynesse his lyf;
To lead in ease and holiness his life;
And thanked God that he myghte han hire al,
And thanked God that he might have her entirely,
That no wight his blisse parten shal.
So that no one shall share his bliss.
And preyed hem to laboure in this nede,
And prayed them to labor in this need,
And shapen that he faille nat to spede;
And arrange that he fail not to succeed;
For thanne, he seyde, his spirit was at ese.
For then, he said, his spirit was at ease.
"Thanne is," quod he, "no thyng may me displese,
"Then there is," said he, "nothing that can displease me,
Save o thyng priketh in my conscience,
Save one thing sticks in my conscience,
The which I wol reherce in youre presence.
Which I will tell in your presence.
"I have," quod he, "herd seyd, ful yoore ago,
"I have," said he, "heard said, full long ago,
Ther may no man han parfite blisses two --
There can no man have perfect blisses two --
This is to seye, in erthe and eek in hevene.
This is to say, in earth and also in heaven.
For though he kepe hym fro the synnes sevene,
For though he keep him from the seven sins,
And eek from every branche of thilke tree,
And also from every branch of that same tree (of sin),
Yet is ther so parfit felicitee
Yet is there such perfect felicity
And so greet ese and lust in mariage
And such great ease and pleasure in marriage
That evere I am agast now in myn age
That ever I am frightened now in my old age
That I shal lede now so myrie a lyf,
That I shall lead now so merry a life,
So delicat, withouten wo and stryf,
So pleasing, without woe and strife,
That I shal have myn hevene in erthe heere.
That I shall have my heaven here in earth.
For sith that verray hevene is boght so deere
For since that true heaven is bought so dear
With tribulacion and greet penaunce,
With tribulation and great penance,
How sholde I thanne, that lyve in swich plesaunce
How should I then, who live in such pleasure
As alle wedded men doon with hire wyvys,
As all wedded men do with her wives,
Come to the blisse ther Crist eterne on lyve ys?
Come to the bliss where Christ eternally lives?
This is my drede, and ye, my bretheren tweye,
This is my dread, and you, my brethren two,
Assoilleth me this question, I preye."
Resolve this problem, I pray."
Justinus, which that hated his folye,
Justinus, who hated his folly,
Answerde anon right in his japerye;
Answered straight away in his mockery;
And for he wolde his longe tale abregge,
And because he would his long tale abridge,
He wolde noon auctoritee allegge,
He would cite no authority,
But seyde, "Sire, so ther be noon obstacle
But said, "Sir, providing there be no obstacle
Oother than this, God of his hygh myracle
Other than this, God by his high miracle
And of his mercy may so for yow wirche
And of his mercy may so for you work
That, er ye have youre right of hooly chirche,
That, before you have your rite of holy church (last sacrament),
Ye may repente of wedded mannes lyf,
You may repent of the wedded man's life,
In which ye seyn ther is no wo ne stryf.
In which you say there is no woe nor strife.
And elles, God forbede but he sente
And else, God forbid that he should not send
A wedded man hym grace to repente
A wedded man grace to repent himself
Wel ofte rather than a sengle man!
Well more often than a single man!
And therfore, sire -- the beste reed I kan --
And therefore, sir -- the best advice I know --
Dispeire yow noght, but have in youre memorie,
Despair you not, but have in your memory,
Paraunter she may be youre purgatorie!
Perhaps she may be your purgatory!
She may be Goddes meene and Goddes whippe;
She may be God's instrument and God's whip;
Thanne shal youre soule up to hevene skippe
Then shall your soul up to heaven skip
Swifter than dooth an arwe out of a bowe.
Swifter than does an arrow out of a bow.
I hope to God, herafter shul ye knowe
I hope to God, hereafter shall you know
That ther nys no so greet felicitee
That there is not so great felicity
In mariage, ne nevere mo shal bee,
In marriage, nor never more shall be,
That yow shal lette of youre savacion,
That shall keep you from your salvation,
So that ye use, as skile is and reson,
Providing that you use, as is proper and reasonable,
The lustes of youre wyf attemprely,
The pleasures of your wife moderately,
And that ye plese hire nat to amorously,
And that you please her not too amorously,
And that ye kepe yow eek from oother synne.
And that you keep yourself also from other sin.
My tale is doon, for my wit is thynne.
My tale is done, for my wit is thin.
Beth nat agast herof, my brother deere,
Be not afraid of this, my brother dear,
But lat us waden out of this mateere.
But let us wade out of this matter.
The Wyf of Bathe, if ye han understonde,
The Wife of Bath, if you have understood her,
Of mariage, which we have on honde,
Of marriage, which we have in hand,
Declared hath ful wel in litel space.
Declared has full well in little space.
Fareth now wel. God have yow in his grace."
Now farewell. God have you in his grace."
And with this word this Justyn and his brother
And with this word this Justin and his brother
Han take hir leve, and ech of hem of oother.
Have taken their leave, and each of them of other.
For whan they saughe that it moste nedes be,
For when they saw that it must necessarily be,
They wroghten so, by sly and wys tretee,
They worked so, by sly and wise negotiation,
That she, this mayden which that Mayus highte,
That she, this maiden who May was called,
As hastily as evere that she myghte
As hastily as ever that she might
Shal wedded be unto this Januarie.
Shall wedded be unto this January.
I trowe it were to longe yow to tarie,
I believe it would be too long to delay you,
If I yow tolde of every scrit and bond
If I told you of every legal document and bond
By which that she was feffed in his lond,
By which she was endowed with his land,
Or for to herknen of hir riche array.
Or to hear of her rich array.
But finally ycomen is the day
But finally the day is come
That to the chirche bothe be they went
That to the church both are they went
For to receyve the hooly sacrement.
To receive the holy sacrament (of marriage).
Forth comth the preest, with stole aboute his nekke,
Forth comes the priest, with stole about his neck,
And bad hire be lyk Sarra and Rebekke
And commanded her to be like Sarah and Rebecca
In wysdom and in trouthe of mariage;
In wisdom and in faithfulness of marriage;
And seyde his orisons, as is usage,
And said his prayers, as is the usage,
And croucheth hem, and bad God sholde hem blesse,
And makes the sign of the cross over them, and prayed God should them bless,
And made al siker ynogh with hoolynesse.
And made all secure enough with holiness.
Thus been they wedded with solempnitee,
Thus are they wedded with solemnity,
And at the feeste sitteth he and she
And at the feast sits he and she
With othere worthy folk upon the deys.
With other worthy folk upon the dais.
Al ful of joye and blisse is the paleys,
All full of joy and bliss is the palace,
And ful of instrumentz and of vitaille,
And full of instruments and of foods,
The mooste deyntevous of al Ytaille.
The most delicious of all Italy.
Biforn hem stoode instrumentz of swich soun
Before them stood instruments of such sound
That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphioun,
That Orpheus, nor Amphioun of Thebes,
Ne maden nevere swich a melodye.
Made never such a melody.
At every cours thanne cam loud mynstralcye
At every course then came loud minstrelsy
That nevere tromped Joab for to heere,
That never trumpeted Joab to be heard,
Nor he Theodomas, yet half so cleere
Nor that Theodomas, yet half so clear
At Thebes whan the citee was in doute.
At Thebes when the city was in danger.
Bacus the wyn hem shynketh al aboute,
Bacchus pours them the wine all around,
And Venus laugheth upon every wight,
And Venus laughs upon every person,
For Januarie was bicome hir knyght
For January had become her knight
And wolde bothe assayen his corage
And would test his spirit both
In libertee, and eek in mariage;
In liberty, and also in marriage;
And with hire fyrbrond in hire hand aboute
And with her torch in her hand about
Daunceth biforn the bryde and al the route.
Dances before the bride and all the company.
And certeinly, I dar right wel seyn this,
And certainly, I dare right well say this,
Ymeneus, that god of weddyng is,
Hymen, that god of wedding is,
Saugh nevere his lyf so myrie a wedded man.
Saw never in his life so merry a wedded man.
Hoold thou thy pees, thou poete Marcian,
Hold thou thy peace, thou poet Martianus Capella,
That writest us that ilke weddyng murie
Who writes for us that same wedding merry
Of hire Philologie and hym Mercurie,
Of her, Philology, and him, Mercury,
And of the songes that the Muses songe!
And of the songs that the Muses sang!
To smal is bothe thy penne, and eek thy tonge,
Too small is both thy pen, and also thy tongue,
For to descryven of this mariage.
To describe this marriage.
Whan tendre youthe hath wedded stoupyng age,
When tender youth has wedded stooping age,
Ther is swich myrthe that it may nat be writen.
There is such mirth that it can not be written.
Assayeth it youreself; thanne may ye witen
Try it yourself; then can you know
If that I lye or noon in this matiere.
If I lie or not in this matter.
Mayus, that sit with so benyngne a chiere,
May, that sits with so benign a manner,
Hire to biholde it semed fayerye.
Her to behold it seemed an enchantment.
Queene Ester looked nevere with swich an ye
Queen Esther looked never with such an eye
On Assuer, so meke a look hath she.
On Ahasuerus, so meek a look has she.
I may yow nat devyse al hir beautee.
I can not describe to you all her beauty.
But thus muche of hire beautee telle I may,
But thus much of her beauty tell I can,
That she was lyk the brighte morwe of May,
That she was like the bright morning of May,
Fulfild of alle beautee and plesaunce.
Filled with all beauty and delight.
This Januarie is ravysshed in a traunce
This January is ravished in a trance
At every tyme he looked on hir face;
At every time he looked on her face;
But in his herte he gan hire to manace
But in his heart he began to menace her
That he that nyght in armes wolde hire streyne
That he that night in arms would her strain
Harder than evere Parys dide Eleyne.
Harder than ever Paris did Helen of Troy.
But nathelees yet hadde he greet pitee
But nevertheless yet had he great pity
That thilke nyght offenden hire moste he,
That that same night he must offend her,
And thoughte, "Allas! O tendre creature,
And thought, "Alas! O tender creature,
Now wolde God ye myghte wel endure
Now would God you might well endure
Al my corage, it is so sharp and keene!
All my desire, it is so sharp and keen!
I am agast ye shul it nat susteene.
I am afraid you shall not be able to endure it.
But God forbede that I dide al my myght!
But God forbid that I did all my might!
Now wolde God that it were woxen nyght,
Now would God that it were become night,
And that the nyght wolde lasten everemo.
And that the night would last evermore.
I wolde that al this peple were ago."
I would that all this people were gone."
And finally he dooth al his labour,
And finally he takes all possible pains,
As he best myghte, savynge his honour,
As he best could, so far as good manners allowed,
To haste hem fro the mete in subtil wyse.
To hasten them from the dinner in subtle manner.
The tyme cam that resoun was to ryse;
The time came that it was reasonable to rise;
And after that men daunce and drynken faste,
And after that men dance and drink deeply,
And spices al aboute the hous they caste,
And spiced cakes all about the house they passed,
And ful of joye and blisse is every man --
And full of joy and bliss is every man --
Al but a squyer, highte Damyan,
All but a squire, called Damian,
Which carf biforn the knyght ful many a day.
Who carved before the knight full many a day.
He was so ravysshed on his lady May
He was so ravished on his lady May
That for the verray peyne he was ny wood.
That for the very pain he was nearly crazy.
Almoost he swelte and swowned ther he stood,
Almost he fainted and swooned where he stood,
So soore hath Venus hurt hym with hire brond,
So sorely has Venus hurt him with her torch,
As that she bar it daunsynge in hire hond;
As she carried it dancing in her hand;
And to his bed he wente hym hastily.
And to his bed he went hastily.
Namoore of hym at this tyme speke I,
No more of him at this time speak I,
But there I lete hym wepe ynogh and pleyne
But there I let him weep enough and complain
Til fresshe May wol rewen on his peyne.
Until fresh May will rue on his pain.
O perilous fyr, that in the bedstraw bredeth!
O perilous fire, that in the bedstraw breeds!
O famulier foo, that his servyce bedeth!
O enemy in one's household, that offers his service!
O servant traytour, false hoomly hewe,
O servant traitor, false domestic servant,
Lyk to the naddre in bosom sly untrewe,
Like to the sly untrue adder in one's bosom,
God shilde us alle from youre aqueyntaunce!
God protect us all from your acquaintance!
O Januarie, dronken in plesaunce
O January, drunk with pleasure
In mariage, se how thy Damyan,
In marriage, see how thy Damian,
Thyn owene squier and thy borne man,
Thine own squire and thy servant from birth,
Entendeth for to do thee vileynye.
Intends to do thee villainy.
God graunte thee thyn hoomly fo t' espye!
God grant thee thy foe in thy household to espy!
For in this world nys worse pestilence
For in this world is no worse pestilence
Than hoomly foo al day in thy presence.
Than a foe in thy household always in thy presence.
Parfourned hath the sonne his ark diurne;
The sun has completed his daily journey;
No lenger may the body of hym sojurne
No longer can its body sojourn
On th' orisonte, as in that latitude.
On the horizon, in that latitude.
Night with his mantel, that is derk and rude,
Night with its mantle, that is dark and rude,
Gan oversprede the hemysperie aboute;
Did overspread the hemisphere about;
For which departed is this lusty route
For which departed is this cheerful crowd
Fro Januarie, with thank on every syde.
From January, with thanks on all sides.
Hoom to hir houses lustily they ryde,
Home to their houses cheerfully they ride,
Where as they doon hir thynges as hem leste,
Where they attend to their affairs as they pleased
And whan they sye hir tyme, goon to reste.
And when they see their time, go to rest.
Soone after that, this hastif Januarie
Soon after that, this hasty January
Wolde go to bedde; he wolde no lenger tarye.
Would go to bed; he would no longer tarry.
He drynketh ypocras, clarree, and vernage
He drinks mulled wine, claret, and strong white wine
Of spices hoote t' encreessen his corage;
With hot spices to increase his desire;
And many a letuarie hath he ful fyn,
And many a very fine aphrodisiac has he,
Swiche as the cursed monk, daun Constantyn,
Such as the cursed monk, Dan Constantine,
Hath writen in his book De Coitu;
Has written in his book "Concerning Intercourse";
To eten hem alle he nas no thyng eschu.
To eat them all he was not at all averse.
And to his privee freendes thus seyde he:
And to his private friends thus said he:
"For Goddes love, as soone as it may be,
"For God's love, as soon as it can be done,
Lat voyden al this hous in curteys wyse."
Have all this house emptied in courteous manner."
And they han doon right as he wol devyse.
And they have done right as he will command.
Men drynken and the travers drawe anon.
Men drink and draw the curtain (dividing the room) straightway.
The bryde was broght abedde as stille as stoon;
The bride was brought to bed as still as stone;
And whan the bed was with the preest yblessed,
And when the bed was by the priest blessed,
Out of the chambre hath every wight hym dressed,
Out of the chamber has every one gone,
And Januarie hath faste in armes take
And January has fast in arms taken
His fresshe May, his paradys, his make.
His fresh May, his paradise, his mate.
He lulleth hire; he kisseth hire ful ofte;
He lulls her; he kisses her full often;
With thikke brustles of his berd unsofte,
With thick bristles of his beard rough,
Lyk to the skyn of houndfyssh, sharp as brere --
Like to the skin of a shark, sharp as brier --
For he was shave al newe in his manere --
For he was all freshly shaved in his fashion --
He rubbeth hire aboute hir tendre face,
He rubs her about her tender face,
And seyde thus, "Allas! I moot trespace
And said thus, "Alas! I must do injury
To yow, my spouse, and yow greetly offende
To you, my spouse, and you greatly offend
Er tyme come that I wil doun descende.
Before the time comes that I will down descend.
But nathelees, considereth this," quod he,
But nevertheless, consider this," said he,
"Ther nys no werkman, whatsoevere he be,
"There is no workman, whosoever he be,
That may bothe werke wel and hastily;
That can work both well and hastily;
This wol be doon at leyser parfitly.
This will be done at leisure perfectly.
It is no fors how longe that we pleye;
It does not matter how long we play;
In trewe wedlok coupled be we tweye,
In true wedlock we two are coupled,
And blessed be the yok that we been inne,
And blessed be the yoke that we are in,
For in oure actes we mowe do no synne.
For in our acts we can do no sin.
A man may do no synne with his wyf,
A man can do no sin with his wife,
Ne hurte hymselven with his owene knyf,
Nor hurt himself with his own knife,
For we han leve to pleye us by the lawe."
For we have leave by the law to enjoy ourselves."
Thus laboureth he til that the day gan dawe;
Thus labors he until the day dawned;
And thanne he taketh a sop in fyn clarree,
And then he takes a bit of bread soaked in fine claret,
And upright in his bed thanne sitteth he,
And upright in his bed then sits he,
And after that he sang ful loude and cleere,
And after that he sang full loud and clear,
And kiste his wyf, and made wantown cheere.
And kissed his wife, and acted lecherously.
He was al coltissh, ful of ragerye,
He was frisky as a colt, full of wantonness,
And ful of jargon as a flekked pye.
And full of chatter as a spotted magpie.
The slakke skyn aboute his nekke shaketh
The slack skin about his neck shakes
Whil that he sang, so chaunteth he and craketh.
While he sang, so chants he and croaks.
But God woot what that May thoughte in hir herte,
But God knows what May thought in her heart,
Whan she hym saugh up sittynge in his sherte,
When she saw him sitting up in his shirt,
In his nyght-cappe, and with his nekke lene;
In his night-cap, and with his lean neck;
She preyseth nat his pleyyng worth a bene.
She rates his playing not worth a bean.
Thanne seide he thus, "My reste wol I take;
Then said he thus, "My rest will I take;
Now day is come, I may no lenger wake."
Now day is come, I can no longer remain awake."
And doun he leyde his heed and sleep til pryme.
And down he laid his head and slept until nine.
And afterward, whan that he saugh his tyme,
And afterwards, when he saw his time,
Up ryseth Januarie; but fresshe May
Up rises January; but fresh May
Heeld hire chambre unto the fourthe day,
Held her chamber until the fourth day,
As usage is of wyves for the beste.
As is the best usage of wives.
For every labour somtyme moot han reste,
For every labor sometime must have rest,
Or elles longe may he nat endure;
Or else long can he not endure;
This is to seyn, no lyves creature,
This is to say, no living creature,
Be it of fyssh, or bryd, or beest, or man.
Be it of fish, or bird, or beast, or man.
Now wol I speke of woful Damyan,
Now will I speak of woeful Damian,
That langwissheth for love, as ye shul heere;
That languishes for love, as you shall hear;
Therfore I speke to hym in this manere:
Therefore I speak to him in this manner:
I seye, "O sely Damyan, allas!
I say, "O innocent Damian, alas!
Andswere to my demaunde, as in this cas.
Answer to my question, in this case.
How shaltow to thy lady, fresshe May,
How shalt thou to thy lady, fresh May,
Telle thy wo? She wole alwey seye nay.
Tell thy woe? She will always say nay.
Eek if thou speke, she wol thy wo biwreye.
Also if thou speak, she will thy woe reveal.
God be thyn helpe! I kan no bettre seye."
God be thy help! I can no better say."
This sike Damyan in Venus fyr
This sick Damian in Venus' fire
So brenneth that he dyeth for desyr,
So burns that he dies for desire,
For which he putte his lyf in aventure.
For which he put his life at risk.
No lenger myghte he in this wise endure,
No longer could he in this way endure,
But prively a penner gan he borwe,
But secretly a writing set he borrowed,
And in a lettre wroot he al his sorwe,
And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,
In manere of a compleynt or a lay,
In the manner of a poetic lament or a song,
Unto his faire, fresshe lady May;
Unto his fair, fresh lady May;
And in a purs of sylk heng on his sherte
And in a purse of silk which hung on his shirt
He hath it put, and leyde it at his herte.
He has put it, and laid it at his heart.
The moone, that at noon was thilke day
The moon, that was at noon that same day
That Januarie hath wedded fresshe May
That January has wedded fresh May
In two of Tawr, was into Cancre glyden;
In two degrees of Taurus, was into Cancer glided;
So longe hath Mayus in hir chambre abyden,
So long has May in her chamber abided,
As custume is unto thise nobles alle.
As custom is unto these nobles all.
A bryde shal nat eten in the halle
A bride shall not eat in the hall
Til dayes foure, or thre dayes atte leeste,
Until four days, or three days at the least,
Ypassed been; thanne lat hire go to feeste.
Are passed; then let her go to feast.
The fourthe day compleet fro noon to noon,
The fourth day completed from noon to noon,
Whan that the heighe masse was ydoon,
When the high mass was done,
In halle sit this Januarie and May,
In hall this January and May sit,
As fressh as is the brighte someres day.
As fresh as is the bright summer's day.
And so bifel how that this goode man
And so befell that this good man
Remembred hym upon this Damyan,
Remembered this Damian,
And seyde, "Seynte Marie! how may this be,
And said, "Saint Mary! how can this be,
That Damyan entendeth nat to me?
That Damian does not attend on me?
Is he ay syk, or how may this bityde?"
Is he always sick, or how can this happen?"
His squieres, whiche that stooden ther bisyde,
His squires, who stood there beside,
Excused hym by cause of his siknesse,
Excused him because of his sickness,
Which letted hym to doon his bisynesse;
Which prevented him from doing his duties;
Noon oother cause myghte make hym tarye.
No other cause might make him tarry.
"That me forthynketh," quod this Januarie,
"I am sorry about that," said this January,
"He is a gentil squier, by my trouthe!
"He is a gentle squire, by my troth!
If that he deyde, it were harm and routhe.
If he died, it would be a harm and a pity.
He is as wys, discreet, and as secree
He is as wise, discreet, and as circumspect
As any man I woot of his degree,
As any man I know of his rank,
And therto manly, and eek servysable,
And moreover manly, and also willing to serve,
And for to been a thrifty man right able.
And to be a worthy man right able.
But after mete, as soone as evere I may,
But after dinner, as soon as ever I can,
I wol myself visite hym, and eek May,
I will myself visit him, and also May,
To doon hym al the confort that I kan."
To do him all the comfort that I can."
And for that word hym blessed every man,
And for that word every man blessed him,
That of his bountee and his gentillesse
That of his goodness and his graciousness
He wolde so conforten in siknesse
He would so comfort in sickness
His squier, for it was a gentil dede.
His squire, for it was a gentle deed.
"Dame," quod this Januarie, "taak good hede,
"My Lady," said this January, "take good heed,
At after-mete ye with youre wommen alle,
At after-dinner you with all your women,
Whan ye han been in chambre out of this halle,
When you have been in chamber out of this hall,
That alle ye go se this Damyan.
That all you go see this Damian.
Dooth hym disport -- he is a gentil man;
Cheer him up -- he is a gentle man;
And telleth hym that I wol hym visite,
And tell him that I will him visit,
Have I no thyng but rested me a lite;
When I have done nothing but rested myself a little;
And spede yow faste, for I wole abyde
And hurry yourself, for I will wait
Til that ye slepe faste by my syde."
Until you sleep fast by my side."
And with that word he gan to hym to calle
And with that word he began to him to call
A squier, that was marchal of his halle,
A squire, that was master of ceremonies of his hall,
And tolde hym certeyn thynges, what he wolde.
And told him certain things, what he wanted.
This fresshe May hath streight hir wey yholde
This fresh May has held straight her way
With alle hir wommen unto Damyan.
With all her women unto Damian.
Doun by his beddes syde sit she than,
Down by his bed's side sits she then,
Confortynge hym as goodly as she may.
Comforting him as graciously as she can.
This Damyan, whan that his tyme he say,
This Damian, when he saw his opportunity,
In secree wise his purs and eek his bille,
In a secret way his purse and also his letter,
In which that he ywriten hadde his wille,
In which he had written his desire,
Hath put into hire hand, withouten moore,
Has put into her hand, without (doing) more,
Save that he siketh wonder depe and soore,
Save that he sighs wonderfully deep and sore,
And softely to hire right thus seyde he:
And softly to her right thus said he:
"Mercy! And that ye nat discovere me,
"Mercy! And (I ask) that you not discover me,
For I am deed if that this thyng be kyd."
For I am dead if this thing be known."
This purs hath she inwith hir bosom hyd
This purse has she within her bosom hidden
And wente hire wey; ye gete namoore of me.
And went her way; you get no more from me.
But unto Januarie ycomen is she,
But unto January come is she,
That on his beddes syde sit ful softe.
Who on his bed's side sits full softly.
He taketh hire, and kisseth hire ful ofte,
He takes her, and kisses her full often,
And leyde hym doun to slepe, and that anon.
And laid him down to sleep, and that straightway.
She feyned hire as that she moste gon
She pretended that she must go
Ther as ye woot that every wight moot neede;
Where you know that every person must go by necessity;
And whan she of this bille hath taken heede,
And when she of this letter has taken heed,
She rente it al to cloutes atte laste,
She tore it all to pieces at the last,
And in the pryvee softely it caste.
And in the privy softly threw it.
Who studieth now but faire fresshe May?
Who is perplexed now but fair fresh May?
Adoun by olde Januarie she lay,
Down by old January she lay,
That sleep til that the coughe hath hym awaked.
Who slept until the cough has him awaked.
Anon he preyde hire strepen hire al naked;
Straightway he prayed her to strip herself all naked;
He wolde of hire, he seyde, han som plesaunce;
He would of her, he said, have some pleasure;
He seyde hir clothes dide hym encombraunce,
He said her clothes got in his way,
And she obeyeth, be hire lief or looth.
And she obeys, whether she wants to or not.
But lest that precious folk be with me wrooth,
But lest that prudish folk be with me wroth,
How that he wroghte, I dar nat to yow telle,
How he worked, I dare not tell to you,
Or wheither hire thoughte it paradys or helle.
Or whether she thought it paradise or hell.
But heere I lete hem werken in hir wyse
But here I let them work in their way
Til evensong rong and that they moste aryse.
Until bell for evening prayers rang and they had to arise.
Were it by destynee or by aventure,
Were it by destiny or by chance,
Were it by influence or by nature,
Were it by astronomical influence or by nature,
Or constellacion, that in swich estaat
Or configuration of the stars, that in such a state
The hevene stood that tyme fortunaat
The heaven stood that time that it fortunate
Was for to putte a bille of Venus werkes --
Was to present a petition concerning Venus' works --
For alle thyng hath tyme, as seyn thise clerkes --
For every thing has time, as say these clerks --
To any womman for to gete hire love,
To any woman to get her love,
I kan nat seye; but grete God above,
I can not say; but great God above,
That knoweth that noon act is causelees,
That knows that no act is without cause,
He deme of al, for I wole holde my pees.
May he judge of all, for I will hold my peace.
But sooth is this, how that this fresshe May
But truth is this, how this fresh May
Hath take swich impression that day
Has taken such impression that day
Of pitee of this sike Damyan
Of pity for this sick Damian
That from hire herte she ne dryve kan
That from her heart she can not drive
The remembrance for to doon hym ese.
The thought to comfort him.
"Certeyn," thoghte she, "whom that this thyng displese
"Certainly," thought she, "whomever this thing may displease
I rekke noght, for heere I hym assure
I care not, for here I him assure
To love hym best of any creature,
To love him best of any creature,
Though he namoore hadde than his sherte."
Though he had no more than his shirt."
Lo, pitee renneth soone in gentil herte!
Lo, pity runs soon in gentle heart!
Heere may ye se how excellent franchise
Here can you see what excellent generosity
In wommen is, whan they hem narwe avyse.
In women is, when they carefully deliberate a matter.
Som tyrant is, as ther be many oon
Some tyrant is, as there be many a one
That hath an herte as hard as any stoon,
Who has a heart as hard as any stone,
Which wolde han lat hym sterven in the place
Who would have let him die in the place
Wel rather than han graunted hym hire grace,
Well rather than have granted him her grace,
And hem rejoysen in hire crueel pryde,
And rejoice in her cruel pride,
And rekke nat to been an homycide.
And care not to be a homicide.
This gentil May, fulfilled of pitee,
This gentle May, filled full of pity,
Right of hire hand a lettre made she,
In her own hand a letter made she,
In which she graunteth hym hire verray grace.
In which she grants him her true grace.
Ther lakketh noght oonly but day and place
There lacks nothing but only day and place
Wher that she myghte unto his lust suffise,
Where she might satisfy his desires,
For it shal be right as he wole devyse.
For it shall be right as he will devise.
And whan she saugh hir tyme, upon a day
And when she saw her time, upon one day
To visite this Damyan gooth May,
To visit this Damian goes May,
And sotilly this lettre doun she threste
And craftily this letter down she thrust
Under his pilwe; rede it if hym leste.
Under his pillow; let him read it if he wishes.
She taketh hym by the hand and harde hym twiste
She takes him by the hand and hard him squeezes
So secrely that no wight of it wiste,
So secretly that no one knew of it,
And bad hym been al hool, and forth she wente
And bade him be all healthy, and forth she went
To Januarie, whan that he for hire sente.
To January, when he for her sent.
Up riseth Damyan the nexte morwe;
Up rises Damian the next morning;
Al passed was his siknesse and his sorwe.
All passed was his sickness and his sorrow.
He kembeth hym, he preyneth hym and pyketh,
He combs himself, he preens and neatens himself,
He dooth al that his lady lust and lyketh,
He does all that his lady desires and pleases,
And eek to Januarie he gooth as lowe
And also to January he goes as humbly
As evere dide a dogge for the bowe.
As ever did a dog trained to hunt with an archer.
He is so plesant unto every man
He is so pleasant unto every man
(For craft is al, whoso that do it kan)
(For craft is all, whoever can do it)
That every wight is fayn to speke hym good,
That every one is eager to speak good of him,
And fully in his lady grace he stood.
And fully in his lady's favor he stood.
Thus lete I Damyan aboute his nede,
Thus leave I Damian going about his business,
And in my tale forth I wol procede.
And in my tale forth I will proceed.
Somme clerkes holden that felicitee
Some clerks maintain that felicity
Stant in delit, and therfore certeyn he,
Consists of delight, and therefore certainly he,
This noble Januarie, with al his myght,
This noble January, with all his might,
In honest wyse, as longeth to a knyght,
In a respectable manner, as is suitable to a knight,
Shoop hym to lyve ful deliciously.
Arranged for himself to live full voluptuously.
His housynge, his array, as honestly
His lodging, his clothing, as suitably
To his degree was maked as a kynges.
To his degree was made as is a king's.
Amonges othere of his honeste thynges,
Amongst others of his suitable things,
He made a gardyn, walled al with stoon;
He made a garden, walled all with stone;
So fair a gardyn woot I nowher noon.
So fair a garden know I anywhere none.
For, out of doute, I verraily suppose
For, beyond doubt, I truly suppose
That he that wroot the Romance of the Rose
That he who wrote the Romance of the Rose
Ne koude of it the beautee wel devyse;
Could not the beauty of it well describe;
Ne Priapus ne myghte nat suffise,
Nor Priapus could not be adequate,
Though he be god of gardyns, for to telle
Though he be god of gardens, to tell
The beautee of the gardyn and the welle
The beauty of the garden and the well
That stood under a laurer alwey grene.
That stood under a laurel always green.
Ful ofte tyme he Pluto and his queene,
Very often he, Pluto, and his queen,
Proserpina, and al hire fayerye,
Proserpine, and all their fairies,
Disporten hem and maken melodye
Amused themselves and made melody
Aboute that welle, and daunced, as men tolde.
About that well, and danced, as men told.
This noble knyght, this Januarie the olde,
This noble knight, this January the old,
Swich deyntee hath in it to walke and pleye,
Such pleasure has in it to walk and play,
That he wol no wight suffren bere the keye
That he will no one allow to bear the key
Save he hymself; for of the smale wyket
Save he himself; for of the small gate
He baar alwey of silver a clyket,
He bore always of silver a latchkey,
With which, whan that hym leste, he it unshette.
With which, when he desired, he unlocked it.
And whan he wolde paye his wyf hir dette
And when he would pay his wife her marital debt
In somer seson, thider wolde he go,
In summer season, thither would he go,
And May his wyf, and no wight but they two;
And May his wife, and no one but those two;
And thynges whiche that were nat doon abedde,
And things which that were not done abed,
He in the gardyn parfourned hem and spedde.
He in the garden performed and accomplished them.
And in this wyse, many a murye day,
And in this way, many a merry day,
Lyved this Januarie and fresshe May.
Lived this January and fresh May.
But worldly joye may nat alwey dure
But worldly joy can not always endure
To Januarie, ne to no creature.
To January, nor to any creature.
O sodeyn hap! O thou Fortune unstable!
O sudden chance! O thou Fortune unstable!
Lyk to the scorpion so deceyvable,
Similar to the scorpion so deceitful,
That flaterest with thyn heed whan thou wolt stynge;
That flatter with thy head when thou wilt sting;
Thy tayl is deeth, thurgh thyn envenymynge.
Thy tail is death, through thy poisoning.
O brotil joye! O sweete venym queynte!
O brittle joy! O sweet venom deceitful!
O monstre, that so subtilly kanst peynte
O monster, that so subtly can disguise
Thy yiftes under hewe of stidefastnesse,
Thy gifts under appearance of steadfastness,
That thou deceyvest bothe moore and lesse!
That thou deceivest both high and low (everyone)!
Why hastow Januarie thus deceyved,
Why hast thou January thus deceived,
That haddest hym for thy fulle freend receyved?
Thou who had received him for thy closest friend ?
And now thou hast biraft hym bothe his yen,
And now thou hast deprived him of both his eyes,
For sorwe of which desireth he to dyen.
For sorrow of which he desires to die.
Allas, this noble Januarie free,
Alas, this noble generous January,
Amydde his lust and his prosperitee,
Amid his pleasure and his prosperity,
Is woxen blynd, and that al sodeynly.
Is grown blind, and that all suddenly.
He wepeth and he wayleth pitously;
He weeps and he wails pitifully;
And therwithal the fyr of jalousie,
And with all this the fire of jealousy,
Lest that his wyf sholde falle in som folye,
Lest that his wife should fall in some folly,
So brente his herte that he wolde fayn
So burned his heart that he sincerely wished
That som man bothe hire and hym had slayn.
That some man both her and him had slain.
For neither after his deeth nor in his lyf
For neither after his death nor in his life
Ne wolde he that she were love ne wyf,
Would he that she were neither lover nor wife,
But evere lyve as wydwe in clothes blake,
But ever live as widow in clothes black,
Soul as the turtle that lost hath hire make.
Solitary as the turtledove that lost has her mate.
But atte laste, after a month or tweye,
But at the last, after a month or two,
His sorwe gan aswage, sooth to seye;
His sorrow abated, truth to say;
For whan he wiste it may noon oother be,
For when he knew it can not be otherwise,
He paciently took his adversitee,
He patiently accepted his adversity,
Save, out of doute, he may nat forgoon
Except that, no doubt, he can not refrain
That he nas jalous everemoore in oon;
From being more jealous all the time;
Which jalousye it was so outrageous
Which jealousy was so excessive
That neither in halle, n' yn noon oother hous,
That neither in hall, nor in any other house,
Ne in noon oother place, neverthemo,
Nor in any other place, no longer,
He nolde suffre hire for to ryde or go,
He would suffer her to ride or walk,
But if that he had hond on hire alway;
Unless he had a hand always on her;
For which ful ofte wepeth fresshe May,
For which full often weeps fresh May,
That loveth Damyan so benyngnely
Who loves Damian so graciously
That she moot outher dyen sodeynly
That she must either die suddenly
Or elles she moot han hym as hir leste.
Or else she must have him as she wishes.
She wayteth whan hir herte wolde breste.
She expects that her heart would burst.
Upon that oother syde Damyan
Upon that other side Damian
Bicomen is the sorwefulleste man
Is become the most sorrowful man
That evere was, for neither nyght ne day
That ever was, for neither night nor day
Ne myghte he speke a word to fresshe May,
Could he speak one word to fresh May,
As to his purpos, of no swich mateere,
Regarding his purpose, of any such matter,
But if that Januarie moste it heere,
Without January's hearing it,
That hadde an hand upon hire everemo.
Who had a hand upon her always.
But nathelees, by writyng to and fro
But nevertheless, by writing to and fro
And privee signes wiste he what she mente,
And secret signs he knew what she meant,
And she knew eek the fyn of his entente.
And she knew also the aim of his plan.
O Januarie, what myghte it thee availle,
O January, what might it thee avail,
Thogh thou myghtest se as fer as shippes saille?
Though thou could see as far as ships sail?
For as good is blynd deceyved be
For it is as good to be deceived when blind
As to be deceyved whan a man may se.
As to be deceived when a man can see.
Lo, Argus, which that hadde an hondred yen,
Lo, Argus, who had a hundred eyes,
For al that evere he koude poure or pryen,
For all that ever he could peer or pry,
Yet was he blent, and, God woot, so been mo
Yet was he deceived, and, God knows, so are others
That wenen wisly that it be nat so.
That confidently suppose indeed that it is not so.
Passe over is an ese, I sey namoore.
To overlook (trouble) is an advantage, I say no more.
This fresshe May, that I spak of so yoore,
This fresh May, whom I spoke of formerly,
In warm wex hath emprented the clyket
In warm wax has made an impression of the latchkey
That Januarie bar of the smale wyket,
That January carried of the small gate,
By which into his gardyn ofte he wente;
By which into his garden often he went;
And Damyan, that knew al hire entente,
And Damian, who knew all her plan,
The cliket countrefeted pryvely.
The latchkey counterfeited secretly.
Ther nys namoore to seye, but hastily
There is no more to say, but hastily
Som wonder by this clyket shal bityde,
Some wonder by this latchkey shall betide,
Which ye shul heeren, if ye wole abyde.
Which you shall hear, if you will abide.
O noble Ovyde, ful sooth seystou, God woot,
O noble Ovid, full truth sayest thou, God knows,
What sleighte is it, thogh it be long and hoot,
What trick is it, though (finding) it be long and painful,
That Love nyl fynde it out in som manere?
That Love will not find it out in some manner?
By Piramus and Tesbee may men leere;
By Pyramus and Thisbe can one learn;
Thogh they were kept ful longe streite overal,
Though they were kept full long strictly in every way,
They been accorded, rownynge thurgh a wal,
They are agreed, whispering through a wall,
Ther no wight koude han founde out swich a sleighte.
Where no one could have found such a trick.
But now to purpos: er that dayes eighte
But now to purpose: before eight days
Were passed [of] the month of [Juyn], bifil
Were passed [of] the month of [June], it happened
That Januarie hath caught so greet a wil,
That January has caught so great a desire,
Thurgh eggyng of his wyf, hym for to pleye
Through incitement of his wife, to enjoy himself
In his gardyn, and no wight but they tweye,
In his garden, and no one (there) but those two,
That in a morwe unto his May seith he:
That in a morning unto his May says he:
"Rys up, my wyf, my love, my lady free!
"Rise up, my wife, my love, my noble lady!
The turtles voys is herd, my dowve sweete;
The turtle dove's voice is heard, my dove sweet;
The wynter is goon with alle his reynes weete.
The winter is gone with all his rains wet.
Com forth now, with thyne eyen columbyn!
Come forth now, with thy dove-like eyes!
How fairer been thy brestes than is wyn!
How fairer are thy breasts than is wine!
The gardyn is enclosed al aboute;
The garden is enclosed all about;
Com forth, my white spouse! Out of doute
Come forth, my white spouse! Beyond doubt
Thou hast me wounded in myn herte, O wyf!
Thou hast me wounded in my heart, O wife!
No spot of thee ne knew I al my lyf.
No blemish on thee knew I all my life.
Com forth, and lat us taken oure disport;
Come forth, and let us take our pleasure;
I chees thee for my wyf and my confort."
I chose thee for my wife and my comfort."
Swiche olde lewed wordes used he.
Such old ignorant words used he.
On Damyan a signe made she,
To Damian a sign made she,
That he sholde go biforn with his cliket.
That he should go before with his latchkey.
This Damyan thanne hath opened the wyket,
This Damian then has opened the gate,
And in he stirte, and that in swich manere
And in he hurried, and that in such a way
That no wight myghte it se neither yheere,
That no one could either see or hear it,
And stille he sit under a bussh anon.
And quickly he sits still under a bush.
This Januarie, as blynd as is a stoon,
This January, as blind as is a stone,
With Mayus in his hand, and no wight mo,
With May in his hand, and no one else,
Into his fresshe gardyn is ago,
Into his fresh garden has gone,
And clapte to the wyket sodeynly.
And closed the gate quickly.
"Now wyf," quod he, "heere nys but thou and I,
"Now wife," said he, "here is no one but thou and I,
That art the creature that I best love.
That art the creature that I best love.
For by that Lord that sit in hevene above,
For by that Lord that sits in heaven above,
Levere ich hadde to dyen on a knyf
I had rather die on a knife
Than thee offende, trewe deere wyf!
Than thee offend, true dear wife!
For Goddes sake, thenk how I thee chees,
For God's sake, think how I thee chose,
Noght for no coveitise, doutelees,
Not for any greed, doubtless,
But oonly for the love I had to thee.
But only for the love I had to thee.
And though that I be oold and may nat see,
And although I be old and can not see,
Beth to me trewe, and I wol telle yow why.
Be to me true, and I will tell you why.
Thre thynges, certes, shal ye wynne therby:
Three things, certainly, shall you win thereby:
First, love of Crist, and to youreself honour,
First, love of Christ, and to yourself honor,
And al myn heritage, toun and tour;
And all my heritage, town and tower;
I yeve it yow, maketh chartres as yow leste;
I give it to you, draw up deeds as you please;
This shal be doon to-morwe er sonne reste,
This shall be done to-morrow before sun goes to rest,
So wisly God my soule brynge in blisse.
As God my soul may bring in bliss.
I prey yow first, in covenant ye me kisse;
I pray you first, to seal the contract, you kiss me;
And though that I be jalous, wyte me noght.
And though that I be jealous, blame me not.
Ye been so depe enprented in my thoght
You are so deeply imprinted in my thought
That, whan that I considere youre beautee
That, when I consider your beauty
And therwithal the unlikly elde of me,
And in addition to that the unsuitable old age of me,
I may nat, certes, though I sholde dye,
I can not, certainly, though I should die,
Forbere to been out of youre compaignye
Bear to be out of your company
For verray love; this is withouten doute.
For true love; this is without doubt.
Now kys me, wyf, and lat us rome aboute."
Now kiss me, wife, and let us roam about."
This fresshe May, whan she thise wordes herde,
This fresh May, when she these words heard,
Benyngnely to Januarie answerde,
Graciously to January answered,
But first and forward she bigan to wepe.
But first of all she began to weep.
"I have," quod she, "a soule for to kepe
"I have," said she, "a soul to keep
As wel as ye, and also myn honour,
As well as you, and also my honor,
And of my wyfhod thilke tendre flour,
And of my wifehood that same tender flower,
Which that I have assured in youre hond,
Which I have entrusted in your hand,
Whan that the preest to yow my body bond;
When the priest to you my body bound;
Wherfore I wole answere in this manere,
Wherefore I will answer in this manner,
By the leve of yow, my lord so deere:
By the leave of you, my lord so dear:
I prey to God that nevere dawe the day
I pray to God that never dawn the day
That I ne sterve, as foule as womman may,
That I do not die, as foully as woman can,
If evere I do unto my kyn that shame,
If ever I do unto my kin that shame,
Or elles I empeyre so my name,
Or else I damage so my name,
That I be fals; and if I do that lak,
That I be false; and if I commit that offense,
Do strepe me and put me in a sak,
Have me stripped and put me in a sack,
And in the nexte ryver do me drenche.
And in the next river have me drowned.
I am a gentil womman and no wenche.
I am a gentle woman and no wench.
Why speke ye thus? But men been evere untrewe,
Why speak you thus? But men are always untrue,
And wommen have repreve of yow ay newe.
And women have reproof of you always.
Ye han noon oother contenance, I leeve,
You have no other manner of behavior, I believe,
But speke to us of untrust and repreeve."
Except to speak to us of distrust and reproof."
And with that word she saugh wher Damyan
And with that word she saw where Damian
Sat in the bussh, and coughen she bigan,
Sat in the bush, and she began to cough,
And with hir fynger signes made she
And with her finger signs made she
That Damyan sholde clymbe upon a tree
That Damian should climb upon a tree
That charged was with fruyt, and up he wente.
That loaded was with fruit, and up he went.
For verraily he knew al hire entente,
For truly he knew all her plan,
And every signe that she koude make,
And every sign that she could make,
Wel bet than Januarie, hir owene make,
Well better than January, her own mate,
For in a lettre she hadde toold hym al
For in a letter she had told him all
Of this matere, how he werchen shal.
Of this matter, what he must do.
And thus I lete hym sitte upon the pyrie,
And thus I let him sit upon the pear tree,
And Januarie and May romynge myrie.
And January and May roaming merrily.
Bright was the day, and blew the firmament;
Bright was the day, and blue the firmament;
Phebus hath of gold his stremes doun ysent
Phoebus has his streams of gold down sent
To gladen every flour with his warmnesse.
To gladden every flower with his warmness.
He was that tyme in Geminis, as I gesse,
He was that time in Gemini, as I guess,
But litel fro his declynacion
But little from his declination
Of Cancer, Jovis exaltacion.
Of Cancer, Jove's exaltation.
And so bifel, that brighte morwe-tyde
And it so befell, that bright morning-tide
That in that gardyn, in the ferther syde,
That in that garden, in the further side,
Pluto, that is kyng of Fayerye,
Pluto, that is king of Fairyland,
And many a lady in his compaignye,
And many a lady in his company,
Folwynge his wyf, the queene Proserpyna,
Following his wife, the queen Proserpine,
Which that he ravysshed out of [Ethna]
Whom he kidnapped out of Etna
Whil that she gadered floures in the mede --
While she gathered flowers in the mead --
In Claudyan ye may the stories rede,
In Claudian you can read the stories,
How in his grisely carte he hire fette --
How in his grisly chariot he fetched her --
This kyng of Fairye thanne adoun hym sette
This king of Fairyland then set himself down
Upon a bench of turves, fressh and grene,
Upon a bench made of pieces of turf, fresh and green,
And right anon thus seyde he to his queene:
And right away thus said he to his queen:
"My wyf," quod he, "ther may no wight seye nay;
"My wife," said he, "there can no one say nay;
Th' experience so preveth every day
The experience so proves every day
The tresons whiche that wommen doon to man.
The treasons which women do to man.
Ten hondred thousand [tales] tellen I kan
Ten hundred thousand [tales] I can tell
Notable of youre untrouthe and brotilnesse.
(That are) famous concerning your faithlessness and frailty.
O Salomon, wys, and richest of richesse,
O Solomon, wise, and richest of wealth,
Fulfild of sapience and of worldly glorie,
Filled with wisdom and with worldly glory,
Ful worthy been thy wordes to memorie
Full worthy are thy words to (keep in) memory
To every wight that wit and reson kan.
To every one that wit and reason knows.
Thus preiseth he yet the bountee of man:
Thus praises he yet the goodness of man:
`Amonges a thousand men yet foond I oon,
`Amongst a thousand men yet found I one,
But of wommen alle foond I noon.'
But of all women found I none.'
"Thus seith the kyng that knoweth youre wikkednesse.
"Thus says the king that knows your wickedness.
And Jhesus, filius Syrak, as I gesse,
And Jesus, son of Sirak, as I suppose,
Ne speketh of yow but seelde reverence.
Speaks reverence of you but seldom.
A wylde fyr and corrupt pestilence
A wild fir and corrupt pestilence
So falle upon youre bodyes yet to-nyght!
Fall upon your bodies yet to-night!
Ne se ye nat this honurable knyght,
See you not this honorable knight,
By cause, allas, that he is blynd and old,
Because, alas, that he is blind and old,
His owene man shal make hym cokewold.
His own man shall make him cuckold.
Lo, where he sit, the lechour, in the tree!
Lo, where he sits, the lecher, in the tree!
Now wol I graunten, of my magestee,
Now will I grant, of my majesty,
Unto this olde, blynde, worthy knyght
Unto this old, blind, worthy knight
That he shal have ayen his eyen syght,
That he shall have again his eyes' sight,
Whan that his wyf wold doon hym vileynye.
When his wife would do him villainy.
Thanne shal he knowen al hire harlotrye,
Then shall he know all her harlotry,
Bothe in repreve of hire and othere mo."
In reproof of both her and many others."
"Ye shal?" quod Proserpyne, "wol ye so?
"You shall?" said Proserpine, "will you so?
Now by my moodres sires soule I swere
Now by my mother's father's soul I swear
That I shal yeven hire suffisant answere,
That I shall give her sufficient answer,
And alle wommen after, for hir sake,
And all women afterwards, for her sake,
That, though they be in any gilt ytake,
That, though they be in any guilt taken,
With face boold they shulle hemself excuse,
With bold face they shall themselves excuse,
And bere hem doun that wolden hem accuse.
And bear them down who would them accuse.
For lak of answere noon of hem shal dyen.
For lack of answer none of them shall die.
Al hadde man seyn a thyng with bothe his yen,
Although a man had seen a thing with both his eyes,
Yit shul we wommen visage it hardily,
Yet shall we women face it out boldly,
And wepe, and swere, and chyde subtilly,
And weep, and swear, and chide deceitfully,
So that ye men shul been as lewed as gees.
So that you men shall be as ignorant as geese.
"What rekketh me of youre auctoritees?
"What do I care for your authorities?
I woot wel that this Jew, this Salomon,
I know well that this Jew, this Solomon,
Foond of us wommen fooles many oon.
Found of us women many a fool.
But though that he ne foond no good womman,
But though he found no good woman,
Yet hath ther founde many another man
Yet many another man has there found
Wommen ful trewe, ful goode, and vertuous.
Women full true, full good, and virtuous.
Witnesse on hem that dwelle in Cristes hous;
Witness on them that dwell in Christ's house (heaven);
With martirdom they preved hire constance.
With martyrdom they proved their constancy.
The Romayn geestes eek make remembrance
The Roman histories also remind us
Of many a verray, trewe wyf also.
Of many a genuine, true wife also.
But, sire, ne be nat wrooth, al be it so,
But, sir, be not angry, even though it be so,
Though that he seyde he foond no good womman,
Though he said he found no good woman,
I prey yow take the sentence of the man;
I pray you take the meaning of the man;
He mente thus, that in sovereyn bontee
He meant thus, that in perfect goodness
Nis noon but God, but neither he ne she.
There is no one but God, neither man nor woman.
"Ey! for verray God that nys but oon,
"Ah! by him who is the only true God,
What make ye so muche of Salomon?
Why make you so much of Solomon?
What though he made a temple, Goddes hous?
Why though he made a temple, God's house?
What though he were riche and glorious?
Why though he was rich and glorious?
So made he eek a temple of false goddis.
So made he also a temple of false gods.
How myghte he do a thyng that moore forbode is?
How might he do a thing that more forbidden is?
Pardee, as faire as ye his name emplastre,
By God, however approvingly you gloss over his name,
He was a lecchour and an ydolastre,
He was a lecher and an idolater,
And in his elde he verray God forsook;
And in his old age he true God forsook;
And if God ne hadde, as seith the book,
And if God had not, as says the book,
Yspared him for his fadres sake, he sholde
Spared him for his father's sake, he should
Have lost his regne rather than he wolde.
Have lost his reign sooner than he would have wanted.
I sette right noght, of al the vileynye
I reckon all the villainy
That ye of wommen write, a boterflye!
That you of women write not worth a butterfly!
I am a womman, nedes moot I speke,
I am a woman, I must necessarily speak,
Or elles swelle til myn herte breke.
Or else swell until my heart breaks.
For sithen he seyde that we been jangleresses,
For since he said that we are chatterers,
As evere hool I moote brouke my tresses,
As ever whole I may enjoy my hair (remain alive),
I shal nat spare, for no curteisye,
I shall not cease, for any courtesy,
To speke hym harm that wolde us vileynye."
To speak harm of him that would do us dishonor."
"Dame," quod this Pluto, "be no lenger wrooth;
"My Lady," said this Pluto, "be no longer angry;
I yeve it up! But sith I swoor myn ooth
I give it up! But since I swore my oath
That I wolde graunten hym his sighte ageyn,
That I would grant him his sight again,
My word shal stonde, I warne yow certeyn.
My word shall stand, I warn you certainly.
I am a kyng; it sit me noght to lye."
I am a king; it is not proper for me to lie."
"And I," quod she, "a queene of Fayerye!
"And I," said she, "a queen of Fairy!
Hir answere shal she have, I undertake.
Her answer shall she have, I declare.
Lat us namoore wordes heerof make;
Let us have no more words concerning this;
For sothe, I wol no lenger yow contrarie."
For truly, I will no longer contradict you."
Now lat us turne agayn to Januarie,
Now let us turn again to January,
That in the gardyn with his faire May
That in the garden with his fair May
Syngeth ful murier than the papejay,
Sings full merrier than the parrot,
"Yow love I best, and shal, and oother noon."
"You love I best, and shall, and none other."
So longe aboute the aleyes is he goon,
So long about the garden paths is he gone,
Til he was come agaynes thilke pyrie
Until he was come in front of that same pear tree
Where as this Damyan sitteth ful myrie
Where this Damian sits full merry
An heigh among the fresshe leves grene.
On high among the fresh leaves green.
This fresshe May, that is so bright and sheene,
This fresh May, who is so bright and sheen,
Gan for to syke, and seyde, "Allas, my syde!
Began to sigh, and said, "Alas, my side!
Now sire," quod she, "for aught that may bityde,
Now sire," said she, "for whatever may happen,
I moste han of the peres that I see,
I must have some of the pears that I see,
Or I moot dye, so soore longeth me
Or I must die, so sore I long
To eten of the smale peres grene.
To eat some of the small green pears.
Help, for hir love that is of hevene queene!
Help, for her love that is of heaven queen!
I telle yow wel, a womman in my plit
I tell you well, a woman in my condition
May han to fruyt so greet an appetit
May have for fruit so great an appetite
That she may dyen but she of it have."
That she may die but she have some of it."
"Allas," quod he, "that I ne had heer a knave
"Alas," said he, "that I do not have here a servant boy
That koude clymbe! Allas, allas," quod he,
That could climb! Alas, alas," said he,
"For I am blynd!" "Ye, sire, no fors," quod she;
"For I am blind!" "Yea, sir, no matter," said she;
"But wolde ye vouche sauf, for Goddes sake,
"But would you grant, for God's sake,
The pyrie inwith youre armes for to take,
The pear tree within your arms to take,
For wel I woot that ye mystruste me,
For well I know that you mistrust me,
Thanne sholde I clymbe wel ynogh," quod she,
Then should I climb well enough," said she,
"So I my foot myghte sette upon youre bak."
"If I my foot might set upon your back."
"Certes," quod he, "theron shal be no lak,
"Certainly," said he, "there shall be no lack,
Mighte I yow helpen with myn herte blood."
(Even if) I might you help with my heart's blood."
He stoupeth doun, and on his bak she stood,
He stoops down, and on his back she stood,
And caughte hire by a twiste, and up she gooth --
And caught her by a branch, and up she goes --
Ladyes, I prey yow that ye be nat wrooth;
Ladies, I pray you that you be not angry;
I kan nat glose, I am a rude man --
I can not use circumlocutions, I am an unlearned man --
And sodeynly anon this Damyan
And suddenly at once this Damian
Gan pullen up the smok, and in he throng.
Pulled up the smock, and in he thrust.
And whan that Pluto saugh this grete wrong,
And when Pluto saw this great wrong,
To Januarie he gaf agayn his sighte,
To January he gave again his sight,
And made hym se as wel as evere he myghte.
And made him see as well as he ever could.
And whan that he hadde caught his sighte agayn,
And when he had recovered his sight again,
Ne was ther nevere man of thyng so fayn,
There was never man of anything so happy,
But on his wyf his thoght was everemo.
But on his wife his thought was evermore.
Up to the tree he caste his eyen two,
Up to the tree he cast his eyes two,
And saugh that Damyan his wyf had dressed
And saw that Damian had treated his wife
In swich manere it may nat been expressed,
In such a manner it can not be expressed,
But if I wolde speke uncurteisly;
Unless I would speak crudely;
And up he yaf a roryng and a cry,
And up he gave a roaring and a cry,
As dooth the mooder whan the child shal dye:
As does the mother when the child shall die:
"Out! Help! Allas! Harrow!" he gan to crye,
"Out! Help! Alas! Help!" he began to cry,
"O stronge lady stoore, what dostow?"
"O brazen crude lady, what dost thou?"
And she answerde, "Sire, what eyleth yow?
And she answered, "Sir, what ails you?
Have pacience and resoun in youre mynde.
Have patience and reason in your mind.
I have yow holpe on bothe youre eyen blynde.
I have helped you with both your eyes blind.
Up peril of my soule, I shal nat lyen,
Upon peril of my soul, I shall not lie,
As me was taught, to heele with youre eyen,
As I was taught, to heal with your eyes,
Was no thyng bet, to make yow to see,
Was no thing better, to make you to see,
Than strugle with a man upon a tree.
Than to struggle with a man upon a tree.
God woot, I dide it in ful good entente."
God knows, I did it in full good intent."
"Strugle?" quod he, "Ye, algate in it wente!
"Struggle?" said he, "Yea, indeed in it went!
God yeve yow bothe on shames deth to dyen!
God give you both a shameful death to die!
He swyved thee; I saugh it with myne yen,
He screwed thee; I saw it with my eyes,
And elles be I hanged by the hals!"
And else may I be hanged by the neck!"
"Thanne is," quod she, "my medicyne fals;
"Then is," said she, "my medicine false;
For certeinly, if that ye myghte se,
For certainly, if you could see,
Ye wolde nat seyn thise wordes unto me.
You would not say these words unto me.
Ye han som glymsyng, and no parfit sighte."
You have some glimpse, and no perfect sight."
"I se," quod he, "as wel as evere I myghte,
"I see," said he, "as well as ever I could,
Thonked be God! With bothe myne eyen two,
Thanked be God! With both my eyes two,
And by my trouthe, me thoughte he dide thee so."
And by my troth, it seemed to me he did thee so."
"Ye maze, maze, goode sire," quod she;
"You are dazed, dazed, good sir," said she;
"This thank have I for I have maad yow see.
"This thanks have I because I have made you see.
Allas," quod she, "that evere I was so kynde!"
Alas," said she, "that ever I was so kind!"
"Now, dame," quod he, "lat al passe out of mynde.
"Now, lady," said he, "let all pass out of mind.
Com doun, my lief, and if I have myssayd,
Come down, my dear, and if I have misspoken,
God helpe me so, as I am yvele apayd.
So God help me, I am very sorry.
But, by my fader soule, I wende han seyn
But, by my father's soul, I thought to have seen
How that this Damyan hadde by thee leyn,
How this Damian had by thee laid,
And that thy smok hadde leyn upon his brest."
And thy smock had lain upon his breast."
"Ye, sire," quod she, "ye may wene as yow lest.
"Yea, sir," said she, "you may think as you please.
But, sire, a man that waketh out of his sleep,
But, sir, a man that wakes out of his sleep,
He may nat sodeynly wel taken keep
He can not suddenly well take heed
Upon a thyng, ne seen it parfitly,
Of a thing, nor see it perfectly,
Til that he be adawed verraily.
Until he be fully awakened.
Right so a man that longe hath blynd ybe,
Right so a man that long has blind been,
Ne may nat sodeynly so wel yse,
Can not suddenly so well see,
First whan his sighte is newe come ageyn,
First when his sight is newly come again,
As he that hath a day or two yseyn.
As he that has a day or two been able to see.
Til that youre sighte ysatled be a while
Until your sight be settled a while
Ther may ful many a sighte yow bigile.
There may full many a sight deceive you.
Beth war, I prey yow, for by hevene kyng,
Beware, I pray you, for by heaven's king,
Ful many a man weneth to seen a thyng,
Full many a man supposes to see a thing,
And it is al another than it semeth.
And it is entirely different than it seems.
He that mysconceyveth, he mysdemeth."
He that misunderstands, he misjudges."
And with that word she leep doun fro the tree.
And with that word she leaped down from the tree.
This Januarie, who is glad but he?
This January, who is glad but he?
He kisseth hire and clippeth hire ful ofte,
He kisses her and embraces her full often,
And on hire wombe he stroketh hire ful softe,
And on her womb he strokes her full softly,
And to his palays hoom he hath hire lad.
And to his palace he has her led home.
Now, goode men, I pray yow to be glad.
Now, good men, I pray you to be glad.
Thus endeth heere my tale of Januarie;
Thus ends here my tale of January;
God blesse us, and his mooder Seinte Marie!
God bless us, and his mother Saint Mary!
"Ey! Goddes mercy!" seyde oure Hooste tho,
"Ah! God's mercy!" said our Host then,
"Now swich a wyf I pray God kepe me fro!
"Now such a wife I pray God keep me from!
Lo, whiche sleightes and subtilitees
Lo, what tricks and craftiness
In wommen been! For ay as bisy as bees
Are in women! For always as busy as bees
Been they, us sely men for to deceyve,
Are they, us innocent men to deceive,
And from the soothe evere wol they weyve;
And from the truth ever will they deviate;
By this Marchauntes tale it preveth weel.
By this Merchant's tale it is well proven.
But doutelees, as trewe as any steel
But doubtless, as true as any steel
I have a wyf, though that she povre be,
I have a wife, though that she poor be,
But of hir tonge, a labbyng shrewe is she,
But of her tongue, a blabbing shrew is she,
And yet she hath an heep of vices mo;
And yet she has a heap of other vices;
Therof no fors! Lat alle swiche thynges go.
Thereof no matter! Let all such things go by.
But wyte ye what? In conseil be it seyd,
But know you what? In secret be it said,
Me reweth soore I am unto hire teyd.
I sorely rue that I am unto her tied.
For and I sholde rekenen every vice
For if I should reckon every vice
Which that she hath, ywis I were to nyce.
Which she has, indeed I would be too foolish.
And cause why? It sholde reported be
And the cause why? It should reported be
And toold to hire of somme of this meynee --
And told to her by some of this company --
Of whom, it nedeth nat for to declare,
By whom, it needs not to declare,
Syn wommen konnen outen swich chaffare;
Since women know how to display such wares;
And eek my wit suffiseth nat therto
And also my wit suffices not concerning this
To tellen al; wherfore my tale is do."
To tell all; therefore my tale is done."
