The murye Wordes of the Hoost to the Monk.
The merry words of the Host to the Monk.
Whan ended was my tale of Melibee,
When ended was my tale of Melibee,
And of Prudence and hire benignytee,
And of Prudence and her goodness,
Oure Hooste seyde, "As I am feithful man,
Our Host said, "On my faith,
And by that precious corpus Madrian,
And by that precious body of Madrian,
I hadde levere than a barel ale
(I swear that) I had rather than have a barrel of ale
That Goodelief, my wyf, hadde herd this tale!
That Goodelief, my wife, had heard this tale!
For she nys no thyng of swich pacience
For she is in no way of such patience
As was this Melibeus wyf Prudence.
As was this Melibeus' wife Prudence.
By Goddes bones, whan I bete my knaves,
By God's bones, when I beat my knaves,
She bryngeth me forth the grete clobbed staves,
She brings me forth the great knobby clubs,
And crieth, `Slee the dogges everichoon,
And cries, `Slay the dogs every one
And brek hem, bothe bak and every boon!'
And break them, both back and every bone!'
"And if that any neighebor of myne
"And if any neighbor of mine
Wol nat in chirche to my wyf enclyne,
Will not in church bow to my wife,
Or be so hardy to hire to trespace,
Or be so bold as to offend her,
Whan she comth hoom she rampeth in my face,
When she comes home she shakes her fists in my face,
And crieth, `False coward, wrek thy wyf!
And cries, `False coward, avenge thy wife!
By corpus bones, I wol have thy knyf,
By God's bones, I will have thy knife,
And thou shalt have my distaf and go spynne!'
And thou shalt have my spinning staff and go spin!'
Fro day to nyght right thus she wol bigynne.
From daybreak to nightfall right thus she will begin.
`Allas,' she seith, `that evere I was shape
`Alas,' she says, `that ever I was created
To wedden a milksop, or a coward ape,
To wed a milksop, or a coward ape,
That wol been overlad with every wight!
That will be browbeaten by every body!
Thou darst nat stonden by thy wyves right!'
Thou darest not defend thy wife's right!'
"This is my lif, but if that I wol fighte;
"This is my life, unless I will fight;
And out at dore anon I moot me dighte,
And out at door immediately I must hasten myself,
Or elles I am but lost, but if that I
Or else I am as good as lost, unless I
Be lik a wilde leoun, fool-hardy.
Be like a wild lion, fool-hardy.
I woot wel she wol do me slee som day
I know well some day she will make me slay
Som neighebor, and thanne go my way;
Some neighbor, and then be on the run;
For I am perilous with knyf in honde,
For I am perilous with knife in hand,
Al be it that I dar nat hire withstonde,
Albeit that I dare not stand up to her,
For she is byg in armes, by my feith:
For she is strong in fighting, by my faith:
That shal he fynde that hire mysdooth or seith --
That shall he find that does or says something amiss to her --
But lat us passe awey fro this mateere.
But let us pass away from this matter.
"My lord, the Monk," quod he, "be myrie of cheere,
"My lord, the Monk," said he, "cheer up,
For ye shul telle a tale trewely.
For you must tell a tale truly.
Loo, Rouchestre stant heer faste by!
Lo, Rochester stands here near by!
Ryde forth, myn owene lord, brek nat oure game.
Ride forth, my own lord, do not interrupt our game.
But, by my trouthe, I knowe nat youre name.
But, by my pledged word, I know not your name.
Wher shal I calle yow my lord daun John,
Which shall I call you -- my lord Don John,
Or daun Thomas, or elles daun Albon?
Or Don Thomas, or else Don Albon?
Of what hous be ye, by youre fader kyn?
Of what monastic order are you, by your father's kin?
I vowe to God, thou hast a ful fair skyn;
I vow to God, thou hast a very handsome complexion;
It is a gentil pasture ther thow goost.
It is a noble pasture where thou goest to eat.
Thou art nat lyk a penant or a goost:
Thou art not like a penitent or a ghost:
Upon my feith, thou art som officer,
Upon my faith, thou art some officer,
Som worthy sexteyn, or som celerer,
Some worthy sexton, or some provisioner,
For by my fader soule, as to my doom,
For by my father's soul, according to my judgment,
Thou art a maister whan thou art at hoom;
Thou art a master when thou art at home;
No povre cloysterer, ne no novys,
No poor cloistered monk, nor no novice,
But a governour, wily and wys,
But a governor, wily and wise,
And therwithal of brawnes and of bones
And, in addition to that, of muscles and of bones
A wel farynge persone for the nones.
A very handsome person indeed.
I pray to God, yeve hym confusioun
I pray to God, give him ruination
That first thee broghte unto religioun!
Who first brought thee unto the monastic life!
Thou woldest han been a tredefowel aright.
Thou wouldest have been a chicken-copulator indeed,
Haddestow as greet a leeve as thou hast myght
If thou haddest as much permission as thou hast power
To parfourne al thy lust in engendrure,
To perform all thy desire in procreation,
Thou haddest bigeten ful many a creature.
Thou would have begotten very many a creature.
Allas, why werestow so wyd a cope?
Alas, why wearest thou so wide a cope?
God yeve me sorwe, but, and I were a pope,
God give me sorrow, unless, if I were a pope,
Nat oonly thou, but every myghty man,
Not only thou, but every mighty man,
Though he were shorn ful hye upon his pan,
Though he had a tonsure very prominently upon his head,
Sholde have a wyf; for al the world is lorn!
Should have a wife; for all the world is lost!
Religioun hath take up al the corn
Religion has taken up all the best
Of tredyng, and we borel men been shrympes.
At copulating, and we laymen are shrimps.
Of fieble trees ther comen wrecched ympes.
Of feeble trees there come weak offshoots.
This maketh that oure heires been so sklendre
This makes our heirs to be so scrawny
And feble that they may nat wel engendre.
And feeble that they can not well beget children.
This maketh that oure wyves wole assaye
This makes it that our wives want to try out
Religious folk, for ye mowe bettre paye
Folk in holy orders, for you can better pay
Of Venus paiementz than mowe we;
Venus' payments than we can;
God woot, no lussheburghes payen ye!
God knows, you pay with no inferior coins!
But be nat wrooth, my lord, though that I pleye.
But be not angry, my lord, though I am joking.
Ful ofte in game a sooth I have herd seye!"
Very often I have heard a truth said in jest!"
This worthy Monk took al in pacience,
This worthy Monk took all in patience,
And seyde, "I wol doon al my diligence,
And said, "I will devote all my efforts,
As fer as sowneth into honestee,
So far as it is conducive to propriety,
To telle yow a tale, or two, or three.
To tell you a tale, or two, or three.
And if yow list to herkne hyderward,
And if you desire to listen to me,
I wol yow seyn the lyf of Seint Edward;
I will tell you the life of Saint Edward;
Or ellis, first, tragedies wol I telle,
Or else, first, I will tell tragedies,
Of whiche I have an hundred in my celle.
Of which I have a hundred in my cell.
Tragedie is to seyn a certeyn storie,
Tragedy means a true narrative,
As olde bookes maken us memorie,
As old books make us remember,
Of hym that stood in greet prosperitee,
Of one who stood in great prosperity,
And is yfallen out of heigh degree
And is fallen out of high degree
Into myserie, and endeth wrecchedly.
Into misery, and ends wretchedly.
And they ben versified communely
And ordinarily they are in verses
Of six feet, which men clepen exametron.
Of six feet, which men call hexameters.
In prose eek been endited many oon,
Many are also composed in prose,
And eek in meetre in many a sondry wyse.
And also in meters of many and various sorts.
Lo, this declaryng oghte ynogh suffise.
Lo, this explanation ought to suffice enough.
"Now herkneth, if yow liketh for to heere.
"Now hearken, if it pleases you to hear.
But first I yow biseeke in this mateere,
But first I beseech you in this matter,
Though I by ordre telle nat thise thynges,
Though I do not tell these things in chronological order,
Be it of popes, emperours, or kynges,
Be it of popes, emperors, or kings,
After hir ages, as men writen fynde,
According to their times, as men find written,
But tellen hem som bifore and som bihynde,
But tell some of them before and some behind,
As it now comth unto my remembraunce,
As it now comes unto my memory,
Have me excused of myn ignoraunce."
Hold me excused for my ignorance."
Heere bigynneth the Monkes Tale.
Here begins the Monk's Tale.
I wol biwaille in manere of tragedie
I will bewail in the manner of tragedy
The harm of hem that stoode in heigh degree,
The harm of those who stood in high degree,
And fillen so that ther nas no remedie
And fell so that there was no remedy
To brynge hem out of hir adversitee.
To bring them out of their adversity.
For certein, whan that Fortune list to flee,
For certainly, when Fortune desires to flee,
Ther may no man the cours of hire withholde.
No man can withstand her onward movement.
Lat no man truste on blynd prosperitee;
Let no man trust on blind prosperity;
Be war by thise ensamples trewe and olde.
Take warning from these examples true and old.
At Lucifer, though he an angel were
At Lucifer, though he was an angel
And nat a man, at hym wol I bigynne.
And not a man, at him will I begin.
For though Fortune may noon angel dere,
For though Fortune may harm no angel,
From heigh degree yet fel he for his synne
From high degree yet for his sin he fell
Doun into helle, where he yet is inne.
Down into hell, in which he is yet.
O Lucifer, brightest of angels alle,
O Lucifer, brightest of all angels,
Now artow Sathanas, that mayst nat twynne
Now art thou Sathanas, that mayst not depart
Out of miserie, in which that thou art falle.
Out of misery, in which thou art fallen.
Loo Adam, in the feeld of Damyssene
Lo Adam, in the field of Damascus
With Goddes owene fynger wroght was he,
With God's own finger was he wrought,
And nat bigeten of mannes sperme unclene,
And not begotten of man's unclean sperm,
And welte al paradys savynge o tree.
And ruled all paradise save for one tree.
Hadde nevere worldly man so heigh degree
Had never worldly man so high degree
As Adam, til he for mysgovernaunce
As Adam, until he for misconduct
Was dryven out of hys hye prosperitee
Was driven out of his high prosperity
To labour, and to helle, and to meschaunce.
To labor, and to hell, and to ruin.
Loo Sampsoun, which that was annunciat
Lo Sampson, whose birth was announced
By th'angel longe er his nativitee,
By the angel long before his nativity,
And was to God Almyghty consecrat,
And was to God Almighty consecrated,
And stood in noblesse whil he myghte see.
And stood in noble estate while he could see.
Was nevere swich another as was hee,
There was never such another as was he,
To speke of strengthe, and therwith hardynesse;
To speak of strength, and bravery as well;
But to his wyves toolde he his secree,
But to his wives he told his secret,
Thurgh which he slow hymself for wrecchednesse.
Through which he slew himself for wretchedness.
Sampsoun, this noble almyghty champioun,
Sampson, this noble almighty champion,
Withouten wepen save his handes tweye,
Without any weapon save his two hands,
He slow and al torente the leoun,
He slew and tore all to pieces the lion,
Toward his weddyng walkynge by the weye.
(While he was) walking toward his wedding by the way.
His false wyf koude hym so plese and preye
His false wife could him so please and earnestly plead
Til she his conseil knew; and she, untrewe,
Until she knew his secrets; and she, untrue,
Unto his foos his conseil gan biwreye,
Unto his foes his secrets did betray,
And hym forsook, and took another newe.
And abandoned him, and took another new lover.
Thre hundred foxes took Sampson for ire,
Three hundred foxes Sampson took for ire,
And alle hir tayles he togydre bond,
And all their tails he tied together,
And sette the foxes tayles alle on fire,
And set the foxes' tails all on fire,
For he on every tayl had knyt a brond;
For he on every tail had tied a torch;
And they brende alle the cornes in that lond,
And they burned all the grain crops in that land,
And alle hire olyveres, and vynes eke.
And all their olive trees, and vines also.
A thousand men he slow eek with his hond,
A thousand men he slew also with his hand,
And hadde no wepen but an asses cheke.
And had no weapon but an ass's jawbone.
Whan they were slayn, so thursted hym that he
When they were slain, he was so thirsty that he
Was wel ny lorn, for which he gan to preye
Was well nigh lost, for which he prayed
That God wolde on his peyne han some pitee
That God would on his pain have some pity
And sende hym drynke, or elles moste he deye;
And send him drink, or else he must die;
And of this asses cheke, that was dreye,
And of this ass's jawbone, that was dry,
Out of a wang-tooth sprang anon a welle,
Out of a molar sprang right away a well,
Of which he drank ynogh, shortly to seye;
Of which he drank enough, shortly to say;
Thus heelp hym God, as Judicum can telle.
Thus God helped him, as The Book of Judges can tell.
By verray force at Gazan on a nyght,
By sheer force at Gaza on one night,
Maugree Philistiens of that citee,
Despite the Philistines of that city,
The gates of the toun he hath up plyght,
The gates of the town he has plucked up,
And on his bak ycaryed hem hath hee
And on his back he has carried them
Hye on an hill whereas men myghte hem see.
High on a hill where men could see them.
O noble, almyghty Sampsoun, lief and deere,
O noble, almighty Sampson, beloved and dear,
Had thou nat toold to wommen thy secree,
Had thou not told to women thy secret,
In al this world ne hadde been thy peere!
In all this world there had not been thy peer!
This Sampson nevere ciser drank ne wyn,
This Sampson never drank alcoholic drinks nor wine,
Ne on his heed cam rasour noon ne sheere,
Nor on his head came any razor or scissors,
By precept of the messager divyn,
By command of the divine messenger,
For alle his strengthes in his heeres weere.
For all his powers were in his hair.
And fully twenty wynter, yeer by yeere,
And fully twenty winters, year by year,
He hadde of Israel the governaunce.
He had the governance of Israel.
But soone shal he wepe many a teere,
But soon shall he weep many a tear,
For wommen shal hym bryngen to meschaunce!
For women shall bring him to misfortune!
Unto his lemman Dalida he tolde
Unto his sweetheart Dalilah he told
That in his heeris al his strengthe lay,
That all his strength lay in his hair,
And falsly to his foomen she hym solde.
And falsely to his foemen she sold him.
And slepynge in hir barm upon a day,
And sleeping on her bosom upon one day,
She made to clippe or shere his heres away,
She contrived to clip or shear his hair away,
And made his foomen al his craft espyen;
And made his foemen know all his craft;
And whan that they hym foond in this array,
And when they found him in this condition,
They bounde hym faste and putten out his yen.
They bound him securely and put out his eyes.
But er his heer were clipped or yshave,
But before his hair was clipped or shaven,
Ther was no boond with which men myghte him bynde;
There was no bond with which men could bind him;
But now is he in prison in a cave,
But now is he in prison in a cave,
Where-as they made hym at the queerne grynde.
Where they made him grind at the mill.
O noble Sampsoun, strongest of mankynde,
O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind,
O whilom juge, in glorie and in richesse!
O formerly judge, in glory and in riches!
Now maystow wepen with thyne eyen blynde,
Now mayst thou weep with thy blind eyes,
Sith thou fro wele art falle in wrecchednesse.
Since thou from prosperity art fallen into wretchedness.
The ende of this caytyf was as I shal seye.
The end of this captive was as I shall say.
His foomen made a feeste upon a day,
His foemen made a feast upon one day,
And made hym as hire fool biforn hem pleye;
And made him as their fool play before them;
And this was in a temple of greet array.
And this was in a temple of great magnificence.
But atte laste he made a foul affray,
But at the last he made a terrifying assault,
For he two pilers shook and made hem falle,
For he shook two pillars and made them fall,
And doun fil temple and al, and ther it lay --
And down fell temple and all, and there it lay --
And slow hymself, and eek his foomen alle.
And slew himself, and also all his foemen.
This is to seyn, the prynces everichoon,
This is to say, every one of the princes,
And eek thre thousand bodyes, were ther slayn
And also three thousand bodies, were there slain
With fallynge of the grete temple of stoon.
By the falling of the great temple of stone.
Of Sampson now wol I namoore sayn.
Of Sampson now I will say no more.
Beth war by this ensample oold and playn
Beware by this example old and plain
That no men telle hir conseil til hir wyves
That no men tell their secrets to their wives
Of swich thyng as they wolde han secree fayn,
Of such things as they would earnestly keep secret,
If that it touche hir lymes or hir lyves.
If it concerns their limbs or their lives.
Hercules
Of Hercules, the sovereyn conquerour,
Of Hercules, the supreme conqueror,
Syngen his werkes laude and heigh renoun;
His works sing his praise and high renown;
For in his tyme of strengthe he was the flour.
For in his time he was the flower of strength.
He slow and rafte the skyn of the leoun;
He slew and tore off the skin of the lion;
He of Centauros leyde the boost adoun;
He laid down the boast of the Centaurs;
He Arpies slow, the crueel bryddes felle;
He slew the Harpies, the fierce cruel birds;
He golden apples rafte of the dragoun;
He seized the golden apples of the dragon;
He drow out Cerberus, the hound of helle;
He dragged Cerberus, the hound, out of Hell;
He slow the crueel tyrant Busirus
He slew the cruel tyrant Busirus
And made his hors to frete hym, flessh and boon;
And made his horses eat him, flesh and bone;
He slow the firy serpent venymus;
He slew the fiery venomous serpent;
Of Acheloys two hornes he brak oon;
He broke one of Achelous' two horns;
And he slow Cacus in a cave of stoon;
And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone;
He slow the geant Antheus the stronge;
He slew the giant Antheus the strong;
He slow the grisly boor, and that anon;
He slew the grisly boar, and that very quickly;
And bar the hevene on his nekke longe.
And long bore the heaven on his neck.
Was nevere wight, sith that this world bigan,
Was never a person, since this world began,
That slow so manye monstres as dide he.
That slew as many monsters as did he.
Thurghout this wyde world his name ran,
Throughout this wide world his name ran,
What for his strengthe and for his heigh bountee,
What for his strength and for his great goodness,
And every reawme wente he for to see.
And he went to see every realm.
He was so stroong that no man myghte hym lette.
He was so strong that no man could prevent him.
At bothe the worldes endes, seith Trophee,
At both ends of the world, says Trophee,
In stide of boundes he a pileer sette.
In stead of boundary markers he set a pillar.
A lemman hadde this noble champioun,
This noble champion had a sweetheart,
That highte Dianira, fressh as May;
Who was called Dianira, fresh as May;
And as thise clerkes maken mencioun,
And as these clerks make mention,
She hath hym sent a sherte, fressh and gay.
She has sent him a shirt, fresh and gay.
Allas, this sherte -- allas and weylaway! --
Alas, this shirt -- alas and woe oh woe! --
Envenymed was so subtilly withalle
Was so skillfully envenomed indeed
That er that he had wered it half a day
That before he had worn it half a day
It made his flessh al from his bones falle.
It made all his flesh fall from his bones.
But nathelees somme clerkes hire excusen
But nonetheless some clerks excuse her
By oon that highte Nessus, that it maked.
By one who was called Nessus, who made it.
Be as be may, I wol hire noght accusen;
However it may be, I will not accuse her;
But on his bak this sherte he wered al naked
But on his back all naked he wore this shirt
Til that his flessh was for the venym blaked.
Until his flesh was blackened because of the venom.
And whan he saugh noon oother remedye,
And when he saw no other remedy,
In hoote coles he hath hymselven raked,
He has himself covered over in hot coals,
For with no venym deigned hym to dye.
For with no venom did he deign to die.
Thus starf this worthy, myghty Hercules.
Thus died this worthy, mighty Hercules.
Lo, who may truste on Fortune any throwe?
Lo, who can trust on Fortune for any time?
For hym that folweth al this world of prees
For he who follows (the ways of) all this dangerous world
Er he be war is ofte yleyd ful lowe.
Before he is aware is often laid very low.
Ful wys is he that kan hymselven knowe!
Very wise is he who can know himself!
Beth war, for whan that Fortune list to glose,
Be wary, for when Fortune wants to deceive,
Thanne wayteth she her man to overthrowe
Then she waits to overthrow her man
By swich a wey as he wolde leest suppose.
By such a means as he would least suppose.
Nabugodonosor
Nebuchadnessar
The myghty trone, the precious tresor,
The mighty throne, the precious treasure,
The glorious ceptre, and roial magestee
The glorious scepter, and royal majesty
That hadde the kyng Nabugodonosor
That had the king Nebuchadnessar
With tonge unnethe may discryved bee.
With tongue can hardly be described.
He twyes wan Jerusalem the citee;
He twice won the city of Jerusalem;
The vessel of the temple he with hym ladde.
The vessels of the temple he took with him.
At Babiloigne was his sovereyn see,
At Babylon was his sovereign throne,
In which his glorie and his delit he hadde.
In which he had his glory and his delight.
The faireste children of the blood roial
The fairest children of the blood royal
Of Israel he leet do gelde anoon,
Of Israel he had gelded indeed,
And maked ech of hem to been his thral.
And made each of them to be his slave.
Amonges othere Daniel was oon,
Among others Daniel was one,
That was the wiseste child of everychon,
Who was the wisest child of them all,
For he the dremes of the kyng expowned,
For he expounded the dreams of the king,
Whereas in Chaldeye clerk ne was ther noon
Whereas in Chaldea there was no clerk
That wiste to what fyn his dremes sowned.
Who knew what his dreams meant.
This proude kyng leet maken a statue of gold,
This proud king had made a statue of gold,
Sixty cubites long and sevene in brede,
Sixty cubits long and seven in breadth,
To which ymage bothe yong and oold
To which image both young and old
Comanded he to loute, and have in drede,
Commanded he to bow down, and hold in veneration,
Or in a fourneys, ful of flambes rede,
Or in a furnace, full of red flames,
He shal be brent that wolde noght obeye.
He who would not obey shall be burned.
But nevere wolde assente to that dede
But never would assent to (do) that deed
Daniel ne his yonge felawes tweye.
Daniel nor his two young fellows.
This kyng of kynges proud was and elaat;
This king of kings was proud and arrogant;
He wende that God, that sit in magestee,
He supposed that God, who sits in majesty,
Ne myghte hym nat bireve of his estaat.
Could not deprive him of his estate.
But sodeynly he loste his dignytee,
But suddenly he lost his high office,
And lyk a beest hym semed for to bee,
And like a beast he seemed to be,
And eet hey as an oxe, and lay theroute
And ate hay like an ox, and lay outside
In reyn; with wilde beestes walked hee
In rain; with wild beasts walked he
Til certein tyme was ycome aboute.
Until a certain number of years had passed.
And lik an egles fetheres wax his heres;
And his hair grew to be like an eagle's feathers;
His nayles lyk a briddes clawes weere;
His nails were like a bird's claws;
Til God relessed hym a certeyn yeres,
Until God released him (after) a certain (number of) years,
And yaf hym wit, and thanne with many a teere
And gave him back his wits, and then with many a tear
He thanked God, and evere his lyf in feere
He thanked God, and always in his life in fear
Was he to doon amys or moore trespace;
Was he to do amiss or again trespass;
And til that tyme he leyd was on his beere
And until that time he was laid on his bier
He knew that God was ful of myght and grace.
He knew that God was full of might and grace.
Balthasar
Belshazzar
His sone, which that highte Balthasar,
His son, who was called Belshazzar,
That heeld the regne after his fader day,
Who held the reign after his father's day,
He by his fader koude noght be war,
He by (the example of) his father could not be warned,
For proud he was of herte and of array,
For he was proud of heart and of behavior,
And eek an ydolastre was he ay.
And also he was always an idolater.
His hye estaat assured hym in pryde;
His high estate made him confident in pride;
But Fortune caste hym doun, and ther he lay,
But Fortune cast him down, and there he lay,
And sodeynly his regne gan divide.
And suddenly his reign began to break apart.
A feeste he made unto his lordes alle
A feast he made for all his lords
Upon a tyme and bad hem blithe bee;
Upon a time and bade them be happy;
And thanne his officeres gan he calle:
And then his officers he did call:
"Gooth, bryngeth forth the vesseles," quod he,
"Go, bring forth the vessels," said he,
"Whiche that my fader in his prosperitee
"Which my father in his flourishing time
Out of the temple of Jerusalem birafte;
Robbed out of the temple of Jerusalem;
And to oure hye goddes thanke we
And to our high gods we give thanks
Of honour that oure eldres with us lafte."
For the honor that our elders left with us."
Hys wyf, his lordes, and his concubynes
His wife, his lords, and his concubines
Ay dronken, whil hire appetites laste,
Always drank, while their appetites lasted
Out of thise noble vessels sondry wynes.
Various wines out of these noble vessels.
And on a wal this kyng his eyen caste
And on a wall this king cast his eyes
And saugh an hand, armlees, that wroot ful faste,
And saw a hand, armless, that wrote very fast,
For feere of which he quook and siked soore.
For fear of which he quaked and sighed deeply.
This hand that Balthasar so soore agaste
This hand that so deeply terrified Belshazzar
Wroot Mane, techel, phares, and namoore.
Wrote Mane, techel, phares, and no more.
In all that land magicien was noon
In all that land was no magician
That koude expoune what this lettre mente;
Who could explain what this text meant;
But Daniel expowned it anoon,
But Daniel explained it right away,
And seyde, "Kyng, God to thy fader lente
And said, "King, God to thy father lent
Glorie and honour, regne, tresour, rente;
Glory and honor, reign, treasure, income;
And he was proud and nothyng God ne dradde,
And he was proud and not at all dreaded God,
And therfore God greet wreche upon hym sente,
And therefore God sent great vengeance upon him,
And hym birafte the regne that he hadde.
And took away from him the reign that he had.
"He was out cast of mannes compaignye;
"He was cast out of man's company;
With asses was his habitacioun,
With asses was his habitation,
And eet hey as a beest in weet and drye
And ate hay as a beast in wet (weather) and dry
Til that he knew, by grace and by resoun,
Until he knew, by grace and by reason,
That God of hevene hath domynacioun
That God of heaven has domination
Over every regne and every creature;
Over every reign and every creature;
And thanne hadde God of hym compassioun,
And then had God on him compassion,
And hym restored his regne and his figure.
And to him restored his reign and his bodily form.
"Eek thou, that art his sone, art proud also,
"Also thou, who art his son, art proud also,
And knowest alle thise thynges verraily,
And knowest all these things truly,
And art rebel to God, and art his foo.
And art rebel to God, and art his foe.
Thou drank eek of his vessels boldely;
Thou drank also of his vessels boldly;
Thy wyf eek, and thy wenches, synfully
Thy wife also, and thy wenches, sinfully
Dronke of the same vessels sondry wynys;
Drank of the same vessels various wines;
And heryest false goddes cursedly;
And worship false gods cursedly;
Therefore to thee yshapen ful greet pyne ys.
Therefore to thee is ordained very great pain.
"This hand was sent from God that on the wal
"This hand was sent from God that on the wall
Wroot Mane, techel, phares, truste me;
Wrote Mane, techel, pares, trust me;
Thy regne is doon; thou weyest noght at al.
Thy reign is done; thou art of no account at all.
Dyvyded is thy regne, and it shal be
Broken up is thy kingdom, and it shall be
To Medes and to Perses yeven," quod he.
Given to Medes and to Persians," said he.
And thilke same nyght this kyng was slawe,
And that same night this king was slain,
And Darius occupieth his degree,
And Darius occupies his throne,
Thogh he therto hadde neither right ne lawe.
Though for this he had neither right nor law.
Lordynges, ensample heerby may ye take
Gentlemen, example may you take from this
How that in lordshipe is no sikernesse,
How in lordship is no security,
For whan Fortune wole a man forsake,
For when Fortune will forsake a man,
She bereth awey his regne and his richesse,
She bears away his reign and his riches,
And eek his freendes, bothe moore and lesse.
And also his friends, both high ranking and low.
For what man that hath freendes thurgh Fortune,
For whatever man who has friends because of Fortune,
Mishap wol maken hem enemys, I gesse;
Misfortune will make them enemies, I believe;
This proverbe is ful sooth and ful commune.
This proverb is very true and very common.
Cenobia
Zenobia
Cenobia, of Palymerie queene,
Zenobia, of Palmyra queen,
As writen Persiens of hir noblesse,
As Persians write of her nobility,
So worthy was in armes and so keene
So worthy was in arms and so fierce
That no wight passed hire in hardynesse,
That no person passed her in boldness,
Ne in lynage, ne in oother gentillesse.
Nor in lineage, nor in other noble traits.
Of kynges blood of Perce is she descended.
Of the blood of kings of Persia is she descended.
I seye nat that she hadde moost fairnesse,
I say not that she had most beauty,
But of hir shap she myghte nat been amended.
But of her shape she could not be improved.
From hire childhede I fynde that she fledde
From her childhood I find that she fled
Office of wommen, and to wode she wente,
Duties of women, and to the woods she went,
And many a wilde hertes blood she shedde
And many a wild hart's blood she shed
With arwes brode that she to hem sente.
With broad-headed arrows that she to them sent.
She was so swift that she anon hem hente;
She was so swift that she quickly seized them;
And whan that she was elder, she wolde kille
And when she was older, she would kill
Leouns, leopardes, and beres al torente,
Lions, leopards, and bears all torn to pieces,
And in hir armes weelde hem at hir wille.
And in her arms handled them at her will.
She dorste wilde beestes dennes seke,
She dared to seek wild beasts' dens,
And rennen in the montaignes al the nyght,
And to run in the mountains all the night,
And slepen under a bussh, and she koude eke
And to sleep under a bush, and she could also
Wrastlen, by verray force and verray myght,
Wrestle, by sheer force and sheer strength,
With any yong man, were he never so wight.
With any young man, were he never so strong.
Ther myghte no thyng in hir armes stonde.
There might no thing withstand her arms.
She kepte hir maydenhod from every wight;
She kept her maidenhead from every person;
To no man deigned hire for to be bonde.
She disdained to be bound to no man.
But atte laste hir freendes han hire maried
But at the last her friends have married her
To Odenake, a prynce of that contree,
To Odenake, a prince of that country,
Al were it so that she hem longe taried.
Although it was so that she long delayed them.
And ye shul understonde how that he
And you must understand that he
Hadde swiche fantasies as hadde she.
Had such fantasies as had she.
But natheless, whan they were knyt in-feere,
But nonetheless, when they were knit together,
They lyved in joye and in felicitee,
They lived in joy and in felicity,
For ech of hem hadde oother lief and deere,
For each of them held the other beloved and dear,
Save o thyng: that she wolde nevere assente,
Save one thing: that she would never assent,
By no wey, that he sholde by hire lye
In any way, that he should by her lie
But ones, for it was hir pleyn entente
But once, for it was her full intention
To have a child, the world to multiplye;
To have a child, the world to multiply;
And also soone as that she myghte espye
And as soon as she could see
That she was nat with childe with that dede,
That she was not with child by means of that deed,
Thanne wolde she suffre hym doon his fantasye
Then would she allow him to do his desires
Eft-soone, and nat but oones, out of drede.
Again, and only but once, no doubt.
And if she were with childe at thilke cast,
And if she were with childe at that time,
Namoore sholde he pleyen thilke game
No more should he play that same game
Til fully fourty wikes weren past;
Until fully forty weeks were past;
Thanne wolde she ones suffre hym do the same.
Then would she once allow him to do the same.
Al were this Odenake wilde or tame,
Even if this Odenake were wild or tame,
He gat namoore of hire, for thus she seyde:
He got no more of her, for thus she said:
It was to wyves lecherie and shame,
It was to wives lechery and shame,
In oother caas, if that men with hem pleyde.
In any other case, if men had sexual relations with them.
Two sones by this Odenake hadde she,
Two sons by this Odenake had she,
The whiche she kepte in vertu and lettrure.
Whom she kept in virtue and learning.
But now unto oure tale turne we.
But now unto our tale we turn.
I seye, so worshipful a creature,
I say, so worshipful a creature,
And wys therwith, and large with mesure,
And wise also, and generous in moderation,
So penyble in the werre, and curteis eke,
So assiduous in the war, and courtly also,
Ne moore labour myghte in werre endure,
Nor more labor could in war endure,
Was noon, though al this world men sholde seke.
Was none, though through all this world men should seek.
Hir riche array ne myghte nat be told,
Her rich furnishings could not be told,
As wel in vessel as in hire clothyng.
As well in utensils as in her clothing.
She was al clad in perree and in gold,
She was all clad in precious stones and in gold,
And eek she lafte noght, for noon huntyng,
And also she did not neglect, for any hunting,
To have of sondry tonges ful knowyng,
To have of various tongues full knowing,
Whan that she leyser hadde; and for to entende
When she had leisure; and to endeavor
To lerne bookes was al hire likyng,
To learn books was all her desire,
How she in vertu myghte hir lyf dispende.
How she in virtue might spend her life.
And shortly of this storie for to trete,
And shortly of this history to treat,
So doghty was hir housbonde and eek she,
So doughty was her husband and also she,
That they conquered manye regnes grete
That they conquered many great realms
In the orient, with many a fair citee
In the orient, with many a fair city
Apertenaunt unto the magestee
Belonging unto the majesty
Of Rome, and with strong hond held hem ful faste,
Of Rome, and with strong hand held them very tightly,
Ne nevere myghte hir foomen doon hem flee,
Nor never could their foemen make them flee,
Ay whil that Odenakes dayes laste.
Always while Odenake's days lasted.
Hir batailles, whoso list hem for to rede,
Their battles, whoever may wish to read them,
Agayn Sapor the kyng and othere mo,
Against Shapur the king and many others,
And how that al this proces fil in dede,
And how all this business happened in actuality,
Why she conquered and what title had therto,
Why she conquered and what legal claim she had to it,
And after, of hir meschief and hire wo,
And after, of her troubles and her woe,
How that she was biseged and ytake --
How she was besieged and taken --
Lat hym unto my maister Petrak go,
Let him unto my master Petrarch go,
That writ ynough of this, I undertake.
Who wrote at length about this, I guarantee.
Whan Odenake was deed, she myghtily
When Odenake was dead, she mightily
The regnes heeld, and with hire propre hond
Defended the country, and with her own hand
Agayn hir foos she faught so cruelly
Against her foes she fought so cruelly
That ther nas kyng ne prynce in al that lond
That there was no king nor prince in all that land
That he nas glad, if he that grace fond,
That he was not glad, if he found such grace,
That she ne wolde upon his lond werreye.
That she would not make war upon his land.
With hire they maden alliance by bond
With her they made alliance by covenant
To been in pees, and lete hire ride and pleye.
To be in peace, and let her ride about and enjoy herself.
The Emperour of Rome, Claudius
The Emperor of Rome, Claudius
Ne hym bifore, the Romayn Galien,
Nor, before him, the Roman Galien,
Ne dorste nevere been so corageus,
Dared never be so courageous
Ne noon Ermyn, ne noon Egipcien,
Nor any Armenian, nor any Egyptian,
Ne Surrien, ne noon Arabyen,
Nor Syrian, nor any Arabian,
Withinne the feeld that dorste with hire fighte,
Within the field that dared fight with her,
Lest that she wolde hem with hir handes slen,
Lest she would slay them with her hands,
Or with hir meignee putten hem to flighte.
Or with her troop put them to flight.
In kynges habit wente hir sones two,
In kings' clothing went her two sons,
As heires of hir fadres regnes alle,
As heirs of all their father's reigns,
And Hermanno and Thymalao
And Hermanno and Thymalao
Hir names were, as Persiens hem calle.
Their names were, as Persians call them.
But ay Fortune hath in hire hony galle;
But always Fortune has bitterness in her honey;
This myghty queene may no while endure.
This mighty queen can no longer endure.
Fortune out of hir regne made hire falle
Fortune out of her reign made her fall
To wrecchednesse and to mysaventure.
To wretchedness and to misfortune.
Aurelian, whan that the governaunce
Aurelian, when the governance
Of Rome cam into his handes tweye,
Of Rome came into his two hands,
He shoop upon this queene to doon vengeaunce.
He prepared to do vengeance upon this queen.
And with his legions he took his weye
And with his legions he took his way
Toward Cenobie, and shortly for to seye,
Toward Zenobia, and shortly to say,
He made hire flee, and atte laste hire hente,
He made her flee, and at the last seized her,
And fettred hire, and eek hire children tweye,
And put her in fetters, and also her two children,
And wan the land, and hoom to Rome he wente.
And won the land, and home to Rome he went.
Amonges othere thynges that he wan,
Amongst other things that he won,
Hir chaar, that was with gold wroght and perree,
Her chariot, that was wrought with gold and precious stones,
This grete Romayn, this Aurelian,
This great Roman, this Aurelian,
Hath with hym lad, for that men sholde it see.
Has with him led, so that men should see it.
Biforen his triumphe walketh shee,
Before his triumphal procession she walks,
With gilte cheynes on hire nekke hangynge.
With gilded chains hanging on her neck.
Coroned was she, as after hir degree,
Crowned was she, in accord with her rank,
And ful of perree charged hire clothynge.
And her clothing loaded full of precious stones.
Allas, Fortune! She that whilom was
Alas, Fortune! She that formerly was
Dredeful to kynges and to emperoures,
Fearsome to kings and to emperors,
Now gaureth al the peple on hire, allas!
Now all the people stare on her, alas!
And she that helmed was in starke stoures
And she who wore helmets in violent battles
And wan by force townes stronge and toures,
And won by force strong towns and towers,
Shal on hir heed now were a vitremyte;
Shall on her head now wear a woman's headdress;
And she that bar the ceptre ful of floures
And she that bore the scepter full of flowers
Shal bere a distaf, hire cost for to quyte.
Shall bear a spinning staff, to pay for her living costs.
De Petro Rege Ispannie
Concerning Pedro King of Castille
O noble, O worthy Petro, glorie of Spayne,
O noble, O worthy Pedro, glory of Spain,
Whom Fortune heeld so hye in magestee,
Whom Fortune held so high in majesty,
Wel oghten men thy pitous deeth complayne!
Well ought men complain of thy piteous death!
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
And after, at a seege, by subtiltee,
And after, at a siege, by trickery,
Thou were bitraysed and lad unto his tente,
Thou were betrayed and led unto his tent,
Where as he with his owene hand slow thee,
Where he with his own hand slew thee,
Succedynge in thy regne and in thy rente.
Succeeding to thy reign and to thy income.
The feeld of snow, with th' egle of blak therinne,
The field of snow, with the eagle of black therein,
Caught with the lymrod coloured as the gleede,
Caught by the bird-lime on a rod colored like the burning coal,
He brew this cursednesse and al this synne.
He brewed this cursedness and all this sin.
The wikked nest was werker of this nede.
The wicked nest was worker of this violent act.
Noght Charles Olyver, that took ay heede
Not Charlemagne's Oliver, who always took heed
Of trouthe and honour, but of Armorike
Of truth and honor, but of Armorica
Genylon-Olyver, corrupt for meede,
Ganelon-Oliver, corrupt for a bribe,
Broghte this worthy kyng in swich a brike.
Brought this worthy king into such a plight.
De Petro Rege de Cipro
Concerning Pierre de Lusignan, King of Cyprus
O worthy Petro, kyng of Cipre, also,
O worthy Pierre, king of Cyprus, also,
That Alisandre wan by heigh maistrie,
Who won Alexandria by great strength,
Ful many an hethen wroghtestow ful wo,
To very many a heathen thou wroughtest great woe,
Of which thyne owene liges hadde envie,
Of which thine own lieges had envy,
And for no thyng but for thy chivalrie
And for no thing but for thy chivalry
They in thy bed han slayn thee by the morwe.
They in thy bed have slain thee in the morning.
Thus kan Fortune hir wheel governe and gye,
Thus can Fortune govern and guide her wheel,
And out of joye brynge men to sorwe.
And out of joy bring men to sorrow.
De Barnabo de Lumbardia
Concerning Bernabo Visconti of Lombardy
Off Melan grete Barnabo Viscounte,
Great Bernabo Viscounti of Milan,
God of delit and scourge of Lumbardye,
God of delight and scourge of Lombardy,
Why sholde I nat thyn infortune acounte,
Why should I not thy misfortune recount,
Sith in estaat thow cloumbe were so hye?
Since in rank thou had climbed so high?
Thy brother sone, that was thy double allye,
Thy brother's son, who was thy double kinsman,
For he thy nevew was and sone-in-lawe,
For he was thy nephew and son-in-law,
Withinne his prisoun made thee to dye --
Within his prison made thee to die --
But why ne how noot I that thou were slawe.
But why nor how thou were slain I know not.
De Hugelino Comite de Pize
[Concerning Ugolino, Earl of Pisa]
Off the Erl Hugelyn of Pyze the langour
Of the anguish of Earl Ugolino of Pisa
Ther may no tonge telle for pitee.
There can no tongue tell for pity.
But litel out of Pize stant a tour,
But a little way out of Pisa stands a tower,
In which tour in prisoun put was he,
In which tower in prison he was put,
And with hym been his litel children thre;
And with him are his three little children;
The eldest scarsly fyf yeer was of age.
The eldest was scarcely five years of age.
Allas, Fortune, it was greet crueltee
Alas, Fortune, it was great cruelty
Swiche briddes for to putte in swich a cage!
To put such birds in such a cage!
Dampned was he to dyen in that prisoun,
He was damned to die in that prison,
For Roger, which that bisshop was of Pize,
For Roger, who was bishop of Pisa,
Hadde on hym maad a fals suggestioun,
Had on him made a false accusation,
Thurgh which the peple gan upon hym rise
Through which the people did rise against him
And putten hym to prisoun in swich wise
And put him into prison in such manner
As ye han herd, and mete and drynke he hadde
As you have heard, and meat and drink he had
So smal that wel unnethe it may suffise,
So small that it just barely can suffice,
And therwithal it was ful povre and badde.
And in addition it was very poor and bad.
And on a day bifil that in that hour
And on a day befell that in that hour
Whan that his mete wont was to be broght,
When his meal was accustomed to be brought,
The gayler shette the dores of the tour.
The jailer shut the doors of the tower.
He herde it wel, but he spak right noght,
He heard it well, but he spoke absolutely nothing,
And in his herte anon ther fil a thoght
And in his heart straightway there fell a thought
That they for hunger wolde doon hym dyen.
That they for hunger would make him die.
"Allas!" quod he, "Allas, that I was wroght!"
"Alas!" said he, "Alas, that I was wrought!"
Therwith the teeris fillen from his yen.
Therewith the tears fell from his eyes.
His yonge sone, that thre yeer was of age,
His young son, who was three years of age,
Unto hym seyde, "Fader, why do ye wepe?
Unto him said, "Father, why do you weep?
Whanne wol the gayler bryngen oure potage?
When will the jailer bring our soup?
Is ther no morsel breed that ye do kepe?
Is there no morsel of bread that you do keep?
I am so hungry that I may nat slepe.
I am so hungry that I can not sleep.
Now wolde God that I myghte slepen evere!
Now would God that I might sleep forever!
Thanne sholde nat hunger in my wombe crepe;
Then hunger should not creep in my belly;
Ther is no thyng, but breed, that me were levere."
There is nothing, but food, that I would rather have."
Thus day by day this child bigan to crye,
Thus day by day this child began to cry,
Til in his fadres barm adoun it lay,
Until in his father's bosom down it lay,
And seyde, "Farewel, fader, I moot dye!"
And said, "Farewell, father, I must die!"
And kiste his fader, and dyde the same day.
And kissed his father, and died the same day.
And whan the woful fader deed it say,
And when the woeful father saw him dead,
For wo his armes two he gan to byte,
For woe his two arms he began to bite,
And seyde, "Allas, Fortune, and weylaway!
And said, "Alas, Fortune, and woe oh woe!
Thy false wheel my wo al may I wyte."
I can blame thy false wheel for all my woe."
His children wende that it for hunger was
His children supposed that it was for hunger
That he his armes gnow, and nat for wo,
That he gnawed on his arms, and not for woe,
And seyde, "Fader, do nat so, allas!
And said, "Father, do not so, alas!
But rather ete the flessh upon us two.
But rather eat the flesh upon us two.
Oure flessh thou yaf us, take oure flessh us fro,
Our flesh thou gave us, take our flesh from us,
And ete ynogh" -- right thus they to hym seyde,
And eat enough" -- right thus they to him said,
And after that, withinne a day or two,
And after that, within a day or two,
They leyde hem in his lappe adoun and deyde.
They laid themselves down in his lap and died.
Hymself, despeired, eek for hunger starf;
Himself, despaired, also for hunger died;
Thus ended is this myghty Erl of Pize.
Thus ended is this mighty Earl of Pisa.
From heigh estaat Fortune awey hym carf.
From high estate Fortune cut him away.
Of this tragedie it oghte ynough suffise;
Of this tragedy it ought enough suffice;
Whoso wol here it in a lenger wise,
Whoever wants to hear it in a longer version,
Redeth the grete poete of Ytaille
Read the great poet of Italy
That highte Dant, for he kan al devyse
Who is called Dante, for he can all narrate
Fro point to point; nat o word wol he faille.
In great detail; not one word will he lack.
Nero
Although that Nero were as vicius
Although Nero was as vicious
As any feend that lith ful lowe adoun,
As any fiend that lies very low down (in Hell),
Yet he, as telleth us Swetonius,
Yet he, as Suetonius tells us,
This wyde world hadde in subjeccioun,
Had this wide world in subjection,
Bothe est and west, [south], and septemtrioun.
Both east and west, [south], and north.
Of rubies, saphires, and of peerles white
Of rubies, sapphires, and of white pearls
Were alle his clothes brouded up and doun,
Were all his clothes embroidered from head to toe,
For he in gemmes greetly gan delite.
For he in gems greatly did delight.
Moore delicaat, moore pompous of array,
More fond of luxury, more pompous in behavior,
Moore proud was nevere emperour than he;
More proud than he was never emperor;
That ilke clooth that he hadde wered o day,
That same clothing that he had worn one day,
After that tyme he nolde it nevere see.
After that time he wanted never to see it.
Nettes of gold threed hadde he greet plentee
Nets of gold thread had he in great plenty
To fisshe in Tybre, whan hym liste pleye.
To fish in Tiber, when he wished to amuse himself.
His lustes were al lawe in his decree,
His desires were all lawful in his legal code,
For Fortune as his freend hym wolde obeye.
For Fortune as his friend would obey him.
He Rome brende for his delicasie;
He burned Rome for his pleasure;
The senatours he slow upon a day
The senators he slew upon one day
To heere how that men wolde wepe and crie;
To hear how men would weep and cry;
And slow his brother, and by his suster lay.
And slew his brother, and by his sister lay.
His mooder made he in pitous array,
His mother he put in piteous situation,
For he hire wombe slitte to biholde
For he slit her womb to behold
Where he conceyved was -- so weilaway
Where he was conceived -- so woe oh woe
That he so litel of his mooder tolde!
That he reckoned so little of his mother!
No teere out of his eyen for that sighte
No tear out of his eyes for that sight
Ne cam, but seyde, "A fair womman was she!"
Came, but he said, "A fair woman was she!"
Greet wonder is how that he koude or myghte
Great wonder is how that he could or might
Be domesman of hire dede beautee.
Be judge of her dead beauty.
The wyn to bryngen hym comanded he,
He commanded that the wine be brought to him ,
And drank anon -- noon oother wo he made.
And drank straightway -- no other mourning he made.
Whan myght is joyned unto crueltee,
When might is joined unto cruelty,
Allas, to depe wol the venym wade!
Alas, too deep will the venom go!
In yowthe a maister hadde this emperour
In youth this emperor had a master
To teche hym letterure and curteisye,
To teach him literature and courtesy,
For of moralitee he was the flour,
For of morality he was the flower,
As in his tyme, but if bookes lye;
In his time, unless books lie;
And whil this maister hadde of hym maistrye,
And while this master had of him mastery,
He maked hym so konnyng and so sowple
He made him so cunning and so humble
That longe tyme it was er tirannye
That long time it was before tyranny
Or any vice dorste on hym uncowple.
Or any vice dared unloose itself upon him.
This Seneca, of which that I devyse,
This Seneca, of whom I tell,
By cause Nero hadde of hym swich drede,
Because Nero had of him such dread,
For he fro vices wolde hym ay chastise
For he would always chastise him from vices
Discreetly, as by word and nat by dede --
Discreetly, as by word and not by deed --
"Sire," wolde he seyn, "an emperour moot nede
"Sire," would he say, "an emperor must of necessity
Be vertuous and hate tirannye --"
Be virtuous and hate tyranny --"
For which he in a bath made hym to blede
For which he in a bath made him to bleed
On bothe his armes, til he moste dye.
On both his arms, until he had to die.
This Nero hadde eek of acustumaunce
This Nero had also the custom
In youthe agayns his maister for to ryse,
In youth to rise in the presence of his master ,
Which afterward hym thoughte a greet grevaunce;
Which afterward seemed to him a greet grievance;
Therefore he made hym dyen in this wise.
Therefore he made him die in this manner.
But natheless this Seneca the wise
But nonetheless this Seneca the wise
Chees in a bath to dye in this manere
Chose in a bath to die in this manner
Rather than han another tormentise;
Rather than have another form of torment;
And thus hath Nero slayn his maister deere.
And thus has Nero slain his dear master.
Now fil it so that Fortune liste no lenger
Now it happened that Fortune no longer desired
The hye pryde of Nero to cherice,
The high pride of Nero to cherish,
For though that he were strong, yet was she strenger.
For though he may be strong, yet was she stronger.
She thoughte thus: "By God! I am to nyce
She thought thus: "By God! I am too foolish
To sette a man that is fulfild of vice
To set a man that is filled full of vice
In heigh degree, and emperour hym calle.
In high degree, and call him emperor.
By God, out of his sete I wol hym trice;
By God, out of his throne I will snatch him;
Whan he leest weneth, sonnest shal he falle."
When he least expects it, the most quickly shall he fall."
The peple roos upon hym on a nyght
The people rose upon him on one night
For his defaute, and whan he it espied,
For his wickedness, and when he espied it,
Out of his dores anon he hath hym dight
Out of his doors right away he has hastened himself
Allone, and ther he wende han been allied
Alone, and where he supposed to have been allied
He knokked faste, and ay the moore he cried
He knocked fast, and always the more he cried
The fastere shette they the dores alle.
The tighter they shut all the doors.
Tho wiste he wel, he hadde himself mysgyed,
Then he knew well, he had himself deluded,
And wente his wey; no lenger dorste he calle.
And went his way; no longer dared he call.
The peple cried and rombled up and doun,
The people cried and made a tumult up and down,
That with his erys herde he how they seyde,
That with his ears he heard how they said,
"Where is this false tiraunt, this Neroun?"
"Where is this false tyrant, this Nero?"
For fere almoost out of his wit he breyde,
For fear almost out of his wit he went,
And to his goddes pitously he preyde
And to his gods pitiably he prayed
For socour, but it myghte nat bityde.
For help, but it could not happen.
For drede of this hym thoughte that he deyde,
For dread of this it seemed to him that he died,
And ran into a gardyn hym to hyde.
And he ran into a garden to hide himself.
And in this gardyn foond he cherles tweye
And in this garden found he two churls
That seten by a fyr, greet and reed.
That sat by a fire, great and red.
And to thise cherles two he gan to preye
And to these two churls he did pray
To sleen hym and to girden of his heed,
To slay him and to strike off his head,
That to his body, whan that he were deed,
So that to his body, when he was deed,
Were no despit ydoon for his defame.
No insult was done for his ill fame.
Hymself he slow, he koude no bettre reed,
Himself he slew, he knew no better course of action,
Of which Fortune lough, and hadde a game.
About which Fortune laughed, and amused herself.
De Oloferno
Concerning Holofernes
Was nevere capitayn under a kyng
Was never captain under a king
That regnes mo putte in subjeccioun,
That put more reigns in subjection,
Ne strenger was in feeld of alle thyng,
Nor was stronger in all things concerning the field of battle,
As in his tyme, ne gretter of renoun,
In his time, nor greater of renown,
Ne moore pompous in heigh presumpcioun
Nor more arrogant in high presumption
Than Oloferne, which Fortune ay kiste
Than Holofernes, whom Fortune always kissed
So likerously, and ladde hym up and doun
So wantonly, and led him up and down
Til that his heed was of, er that he wiste.
Until his head was off, before he knew it.
Nat oonly that this world hadde hym in awe
Not only that this world had him in awe
For lesynge of richesse or libertee,
For (fear of) loss of riches or liberty,
But he made every man reneyen his lawe.
But he made every man renounce his religion.
"Nabugodonosor was god," seyde hee;
"Nebuchadnezzar was god," said he;
"Noon oother god sholde adoured bee."
"No other god should be adored."
Agayns his heeste no wight dorst trespace,
Against his command no person dared trespass,
Save in Bethulia, a strong citee,
Save in Bethulia, a strong city,
Where Eliachim a preest was of that place.
Where Eliachim (Joachim) was a priest of that place.
But taak kep of the deth of Oloferne:
But take heed of the death of Holofernes:
Amydde his hoost he dronke lay a-nyght,
Amid his host he lay drunk at night,
Withinne his tente, large as is a berne,
Within his tent, large as is a barn,
And yet, for al his pompe and al his myght,
And yet, for all his pomp and all his might,
Judith, a womman, as he lay upright
Judith, a woman, as he lay on his back
Slepynge, his heed of smoot, and from his tente
Sleeping, smote off his head, and from his tent
Ful pryvely she stal from every wight,
Very secretly she stole (away) from every person,
And with his heed unto hir toun she wente.
And with his head unto her town she went.
De Rege Antiocho illustri
[Concerning the Famous King Antiochus]
What nedeth it of kyng Anthiochus
What needs it of king Antiochus
To telle his hye roial magestee,
To tell his high royal majesty,
His hye pride, his werkes venymus?
His high pride, his venomous deeds?
For swich another was ther noon as he.
For such another was there no one like him.
Rede which that he was in Machabee,
Read who he was in Maccabees,
And rede the proude wordes that he seyde,
And read the proud words that he said,
And why he fil fro heigh prosperitee,
And why he fell from high prosperity,
And in an hill how wrecchedly he deyde.
And on a hill how wretchedly he died.
Fortune hym hadde enhaunced so in pride
Fortune had elevated him so in pride
That verraily he wende he myghte attayne
That truly he supposed he might attain
Unto the sterres upon every syde,
Unto the stars upon every side,
And in balance weyen ech montayne,
And in a scales weigh each mountain,
And alle the floodes of the see restrayne.
And all the floods of the sea restrain.
And Goddes peple hadde he moost in hate;
And God's people had he most in hate;
Hem wolde he sleen in torment and in payne,
Them he would slay in torment and in pain,
Wenynge that God ne myghte his pride abate.
Supposing that God could not reduce his pride.
And for that Nichanore and Thymothee
And because Nicanor and Timotheus
Of Jewes weren venquysshed myghtily,
By Jews were vanquished completely,
Unto the Jewes swich an hate hadde he
Unto the Jews such a hate had he
That he bad greithen his chaar ful hastily,
That he ordered his chariot prepared very hastily,
And swoor, and seyde ful despitously
And swore, and said very angrily
Unto Jerusalem he wolde eftsoone
Unto Jerusalem he would (go) immediately
To wreken his ire on it ful cruelly;
To wreak his ire on it very cruelly;
But of his purpos he was let ful soone.
But of his purpose he was prevented very soon.
God for his manace hym so soore smoot
God because of his threatening so sorely smote him
With invisible wounde, ay incurable,
With invisible wound, ever incurable,
That in his guttes carf it so and boot
That in his guts it carved so and bit
That his peynes weren importable.
That his pains were intolerable.
And certeinly the wreche was resonable,
And certainly the punishment was reasonable,
For many a mannes guttes dide he peyne.
For many a man's gut did he pain.
But from his purpos cursed and dampnable,
But from his cursed and damnable purpose,
For al his smert, he wolde hym nat restreyne,
For all his pain, he would not restrain himself,
But bad anon apparaillen his hoost;
But commanded straightway to prepare his host;
And sodeynly, er he was of it war,
And suddenly, before he was aware of it,
God daunted al his pride and al his boost.
God laid low all his pride and all his boast.
For he so soore fil out of his char
For he so sorely fell out of his throne
That it his limes and his skyn totar,
That it tore to pieces his limbs and his skin,
So that he neyther myghte go ne ryde,
So that he might neither walk nor ride,
But in a chayer men aboute hym bar,
But in a sedan chair men carried him about,
Al forbrused, bothe bak and syde.
All badly bruised, both back and side.
The wreche of God hym smoot so cruelly
The vengeance of God smote him so cruelly
That thurgh his body wikked wormes crepte,
That through his body wicked worms crept,
And therwithal he stank so horribly
And in addition to all that he stank so horribly
That noon of al his meynee that hym kepte,
That no one of all his household that served him,
Wheither so he wook or ellis slepte,
Whether he stayed awake or else slept,
Ne myghte noght the stynk of hym endure.
Could not endure the stink of him.
In this meschief he wayled and eek wepte,
In this affliction he wailed and also wept,
And knew God lord of every creature.
And acknowledged God lord of every creature.
To al his hoost and to hymself also
To all his host and to himself also
Ful wlatsom was the stynk of his careyne;
Full loathsome was the stink of his decaying body;
No man ne myghte hym bere to ne fro.
No man could bear him in any way.
And in this stynk and this horrible peyne,
And in this stink and this horrible pain,
He starf ful wrecchedly in a monteyne.
He died very wretchedly on a mountain.
Thus hath this robbour and this homycide,
Thus has this robber and this homicide,
That many a man made to wepe and pleyne,
That many a man made to weep and mourn,
Swich gerdoun as bilongeth unto pryde.
Such reward as belongs to pride.
De Alexandro
[Concerning Alexander]
The storie of Alisaundre is so commune
The history of Alexander is so commonly known
That every wight that hath discrecioun
That every person who has good judgment
Hath herd somwhat or al of his fortune.
Has heard something or all of his fortune.
This wyde world, as in conclusioun,
This wide world, in the end,
He wan by strengthe, or for his hye renoun
He won by strength, or for his high renown
They weren glad for pees unto hym sende.
They were glad to send unto him (to sue) for peace .
The pride of man and beest he leyde adoun,
The pride of man and beast he laid low,
Wherso he cam, unto the worldes ende.
Wherever he came, unto the world's end.
Comparisoun myghte nevere yet been maked
Comparison might never yet be made
Bitwixe hym and another conquerour;
Between him and another conqueror;
For al this world for drede of hym hath quaked.
For all this world for dread of him has trembled.
He was of knyghthod and of fredom flour;
He was flower of knighthood and of nobility;
Fortune hym made the heir of hire honour.
Fortune made him the heir of her honor.
Save wyn and wommen, no thing myghte aswage
Save wine and women, no thing might assuage
His hye entente in armes and labour,
His noble ambition in arms and struggles,
So was he ful of leonyn corage.
So was he full of leonine courage.
What pris were it to hym, though I yow tolde
What honor were it to him, though I you told
Of Darius, and an hundred thousand mo
Of Darius, and a hundred thousand more
Of kynges, princes, dukes, erles bolde
Of kings, princes, dukes, earls bold
Whiche he conquered, and broghte hem into wo?
Whom he conquered, and brought them into woe?
I seye, as fer as man may ryde or go,
I say, as far as man can ride or walk,
The world was his -- what sholde I moore devyse?
The world was his -- what more should I tell?
For though I write or tolde yow everemo
For though I should write or told you evermore
Of his knyghthod, it myghte nat suffise.
About his knighthood, it could not suffice.
Twelf yeer he regned, as seith Machabee.
Twelve years he reigned, as says Maccabees.
Philippes sone of Macidoyne he was,
He was the son of Philip of Macedonia,
That first was kyng in Grece the contree.
Who first was king in the country of Greece.
O worthy, gentil Alisandre, allas,
O worthy, noble Alexander, alas,
That evere sholde fallen swich a cas!
That ever should befall such a case!
Empoysoned of thyn owene folk thou weere;
Thou were poisoned by thine own folk;
Thy sys Fortune hath turned into aas,
Fortune has turned thy six [highest throw] into an ace [lowest],
And for thee ne weep she never a teere.
And for thee she wept never a tear.
Who shal me yeven teeris to compleyne
Who shall give me tears to complain
The deeth of gentillesse and of franchise,
The death of nobility and of magnanimity,
That al the world weelded in his demeyne,
Who all the world wielded in his control,
And yet hym thoughte it myghte nat suffise?
And yet it seemed to him it might not suffice?
So ful was his corage of heigh emprise.
So full was his disposition of high knightly prowess.
Allas, who shal me helpe to endite
Alas, who shall me help to indict
False Fortune, and poyson to despise,
False Fortune, and to despise poison,
The whiche two of al this wo I wyte?
The which two for all this woe I blame?
De Julio Cesare
Concerning Julius Caesar
By wisedom, manhede, and by greet labour,
By wisdom, manhood, and by great labor,
From humble bed to roial magestee
From humble bed to royal majesty
Up roos he Julius, the conquerour,
Up rose this Julius, the conqueror,
That wan al th' occident by land and see,
That won all the west by land and sea,
By strengthe of hand, or elles by tretee,
By strength of hand, or else by treaty,
And unto Rome made hem tributarie;
And unto Rome made them tributary;
And sitthe of Rome the emperour was he
And afterwards of Rome the emperor was he
Til that Fortune weex his adversarie.
Until Fortune became his adversary.
O myghty Cesar, that in Thessalie
O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
Agayn Pompeus, fader thyn in lawe,
Against Pompey, thy father in law,
That of the orient hadde al the chivalrie
Who of the east had all the dominion by conquest
As fer as that the day bigynneth dawe,
As far as where the day begins to dawn,
Thou thurgh thy knyghthod hast hem take and slawe,
Thou through thy knighthood hast them taken and slain,
Save fewe folk that with Pompeus fledde,
Save for a few folk that fled with Pompey,
Thurgh which thou puttest al th' orient in awe.
Through which thou puttest all the east in awe.
Thanke Fortune, that so wel thee spedde!
Thank Fortune, that so well helped thee to succeed!
But now a litel while I wol biwaille
But now for a little while I will bewail
This Pompeus, this noble governour
This Pompey, this noble governor
Of Rome, which that fleigh at this bataille.
Of Rome, who fled at this battle.
I seye, oon of his men, a fals traitour,
I say, one of his men, a false traitor,
His heed of smoot, to wynnen hym favour
His head off smote, to win himself favor
Of Julius, and hym the heed he broghte.
Of Julius, and he brought him the head.
Allas, Pompeye, of th' orient conquerour,
Alas, Pompey, of the east conqueror,
That Fortune unto swich a fyn thee broghte!
That Fortune unto such an end thee brought!
To Rome agayn repaireth Julius
To Rome again repairs Julius
With his triumphe, lauriat ful hye;
With his triumphal procession, very nobly crowned with laurel;
But on a tyme Brutus Cassius,
But on a time Brutus Cassius,
That evere hadde of his hye estaat envye,
Who ever had envy of his high estate,
Ful prively hath maad conspiracye
Full secretly has made conspiracy
Agayns this Julius in subtil wise,
Against this Julius in a cunning manner,
And caste the place in which he sholde dye
And planned the place in which he should die
With boydekyns, as I shal yow devyse.
With daggers, as I shall tell you.
This Julius to the Capitolie wente
This Julius to the Capitol went
Upon a day, as he was wont to goon,
Upon one day, as he was accustomed to go,
And in the Capitolie anon hym hente
And in the Capitol straightway seized him
This false Brutus and his othere foon,
This false Brutus and his other foes,
And stiked hym with boydekyns anoon
And stuck him with daggers straightway
With many a wounde, and thus they lete hym lye;
With many a wound, and thus they let him lie;
But nevere gronte he at no strook but oon,
But never groaned he at no stroke but one,
Or elles at two, but if his storie lye.
Or else at two, unless his history lies.
So manly was this Julius of herte,
So manly was this Julius of heart,
And so wel lovede estaatly honestee,
And so well loved dignified decency,
That though his deedly woundes soore smerte,
That though his deadly wounds sorely pained,
His mantel over his hypes caste he,
His mantle over his hips cast he,
For no man sholde seen his privetee;
So that no man should see his private parts;
And as he lay of diyng in a traunce,
And as he lay a-dying in a trance,
And wiste verraily that deed was hee,
And knew truly that he was dead,
Of honestee yet hadde he remembraunce.
Of decency yet had he remembrance.
Lucan, to thee this storie I recomende,
Lucan, to thee this history I commend,
And to Swetoun, and to Valerius also,
And to Suetonius, and to Valerius also,
That of this storie writen word and ende,
That of this history wrote beginning and end,
How that to thise grete conqueroures two
How to these two great conquerors
Fortune was first freend, and sitthe foo.
Fortune was first friend, and afterwards foe.
No man ne truste upon hire favour longe,
Let no man trust upon her favor long,
But have hire in awayt for everemoo;
But keep an eye on her for evermore;
Witnesse on alle thise conqueroures stronge.
Take note of all these conquerors strong.
Cresus
Croesus
This riche Cresus, whilom kyng of Lyde,
This rich Croesus, once king of Lydia,
Of which Cresus Cirus soore hym dradde,
Of which Croesus Cyrus was sorely afraid,
Yet was he caught amyddes al his pryde,
Yet was he caught amidst all his pride,
And to be brent men to the fyr hym ladde.
And to be burned men led him to the fire.
But swich a reyn doun fro the welkne shadde
But such a rain down from the sky poured
That slow the fyr, and made hym to escape;
That killed the fire, and allowed him to escape;
But to be war no grace yet he hadde,
But to be wary (of Fortune) no grace yet he had,
Til Fortune on the galwes made hym gape.
Until Fortune on the gallows made him gape.
Whanne he escaped was, he kan nat stente
When he had escaped, he can not stop
For to bigynne a newe werre agayn.
Beginning a new war again.
He wende wel, for that Fortune hym sente
He well believed, because Fortune sent him
Swich hap that he escaped thurgh the rayn,
Such luck that he escaped by means of the rain,
That of his foos he myghte nat be slayn;
That of his foes he could not be slain;
And eek a sweven upon a nyght he mette,
And also a dream upon one night he dreamed,
Of which he was so proud and eek so fayn
Of which he was so proud and also so pleased
That in vengeance he al his herte sette.
That in vengeance he set all his heart.
Upon a tree he was, as that hym thoughte,
Upon a tree he was, as it seemed to him,
Ther Juppiter hym wessh, bothe bak and syde,
Where Jupiter washed him, both back and side,
And Phebus eek a fair towaille hym broughte
And Phoebus also brought him a fair towel
To dryen hym with; and therfore wax his pryde,
To dry himself with; and therefore his pride grew,
And to his doghter, that stood hym bisyde,
And to his daughter, who stood him beside,
Which that he knew in heigh sentence habounde,
Whom he knew to abound in good judgment,
He bad hire telle hym what it signyfyde,
He bad her tell him what it signified,
And she his dreem bigan right thus expounde:
And she began right thus to expound his dream:
"The tree," quod she, "the galwes is to meene,
"The tree," said she, "is to signify the gallows,
And Juppiter bitokneth snow and reyn,
And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,
And Phebus, with his towaille so clene,
And Phoebus, with his towel so clean,
Tho been the sonne stremes for to seyn.
Those are to say the sun beams.
Thou shalt anhanged be, fader, certeyn;
Thou shalt be hanged, father, certainly;
Reyn shal thee wasshe, and sonne shal thee drye."
Rain shall thee wash, and sun shall thee dry."
Thus warned hym ful plat and ek ful pleyn
Thus warned him very bluntly and also very plainly
His doghter, which that called was Phanye.
His daughter, who was called Phanye.
Anhanged was Cresus, the proude kyng;
Hanged was Cresus, the proud king;
His roial trone myghte hym nat availle.
His royal throne could not help him.
Tragedies noon oother maner thyng
Tragedies no other sort of thing
Ne kan in syngyng crie ne biwaille
Can in singing cry nor bewail (anything)
But that Fortune alwey wole assaille
But that Fortune always will assail
With unwar strook the regnes that been proude;
With unexpected stroke the reigns that are proud;
For whan men trusteth hire, thanne wol she faille,
For when men trust her, then will she fail,
And covere hire brighte face with a clowde.
And cover her bright face with a cloud.
