The wordes of the Hoost to the Phisicien and Pardoner.
The words of the host to the physician and pardoner.
Oure Hooste gan to swere as he were wood;
Our Host began to swear as if he was crazy;
"Harrow!" quod he, "by nayles and by blood!
"Alas!" said he, "by (Christ's) nails and by (His) blood!
This was a fals cherl and a fals justise.
This was a false churl and a false judge.
As shameful deeth as herte may devyse
As shameful a death as heart can devise
Come to thise juges and hire advocatz!
Come to these judges and their advocates!
Algate this sely mayde is slayn, allas!
At any rate, this innocent maid is slain, alas!
Allas, to deere boughte she beautee!
Alas, too dearly she paid for her beauty!
Wherfore I seye al day that men may see
Therefore I say that every day men may see
That yiftes of Fortune and of Nature
That gifts of Fortune and of Nature
Been cause of deeth to many a creature.
Are cause of death to many a creature.
Hire beautee was hire deth, I dar wel sayn.
Her beauty was her death, I dare well say.
Allas, so pitously as she was slayn!
Alas, so pitifully as she was slain!
Of bothe yiftes that I speke of now
Of both gifts that I speak of now
Men han ful ofte moore for harm than prow.
Men have very often more harm than benefit.
But trewely, myn owene maister deere,
But truly, mine own master dear,
This is a pitous tale for to heere.
This is a pitiful tale to hear.
But nathelees, passe over; is no fors.
But nonetheless, pass over; is does not matter.
I pray to God so save thy gentil cors,
I pray to God so save thy gentle body,
And eek thyne urynals and thy jurdones,
And also thy vessels for analyzing urine and thy flasks,
Thyn ypocras, and eek thy galiones,
Thine ipocras, and also thy galiones (medicines),
And every boyste ful of thy letuarie;
And every container full of thy electuaries;
God blesse hem, and oure lady Seinte Marie!
God bless them, and our lady Saint Mary!
So moot I theen, thou art a propre man,
As I may prosper, thou art a proper man,
And lyk a prelat, by Seint Ronyan!
And like a prelate, by Saint Ronyan!
Seyde I nat wel? I kan nat speke in terme;
Said I not well? I can not speak in technical terms;
But wel I woot thou doost myn herte to erme,
But well I know thou makes mine heart to grieve so,
That I almoost have caught a cardynacle.
That I almost have caught a palpitation of the heart.
By corpus bones! but I have triacle,
By corpus' bones! unless I have medicine,
Or elles a draughte of moyste and corny ale,
Or else a draught of fresh and strong ale,
Or but I heere anon a myrie tale,
Or unless I hear right now a merry tale,
Myn herte is lost for pitee of this mayde.
My heart is lost for pity of this maid.
Thou beel amy, thou Pardoner," he sayde,
Thou fair friend (rascal), thou Pardoner," he said,
"Telle us som myrthe or japes right anon."
"Tell us some mirth or comic tales right away."
"It shal be doon," quod he, "by Seint Ronyon!
"It shall be done," said he, "by Saint Ronyon!
But first," quod he, "heere at this alestake
But first," said he, "here at this ale stake (tavern sign)
I wol bothe drynke and eten of a cake."
I will both drink and eat of a cake."
But right anon thise gentils gonne to crye,
But right away these gentlefolk began to cry,
"Nay, lat hym telle us of no ribaudye!
"Nay, let him tell us of no ribaldry!
Telle us som moral thyng, that we may leere
Tell us some moral thing, that we may learn
Som wit, and thanne wol we gladly heere."
Some useful knowledge, and then will we gladly hear."
"I graunte, ywis," quod he, "but I moot thynke
"I agree, indeed," said he, "but I must think
Upon som honest thyng while that I drynke."
About some respectable thing while I drink."
Heere folweth the Prologe of the Pardoners Tale.
Here follows the Prologue of the Pardoner's Tale.
"Lordynges," quod he, "in chirches whan I preche,
"Gentlemen," he said, "in churches when I preach,
I peyne me to han an hauteyn speche,
I take pains to have a loud voice,
And rynge it out as round as gooth a belle,
And ring it out as round as goes a belle,
For I kan al by rote that I telle.
For I know all by rote that I tell.
My theme is alwey oon, and evere was --
My theme is always the same, and ever was --
Radix malorum est Cupiditas.
'Greed is the root of all evil.'
"First I pronounce whennes that I come,
"First I pronounce from whence I come,
And thanne my bulles shewe I, alle and some.
And then my papal bulls I show, each and every one.
Oure lige lordes seel on my patente,
Our liege lord's seal on my letter of authorization,
That shewe I first, my body to warente,
I show that first, to protect my body,
That no man be so boold, ne preest ne clerk,
So that no man be so bold, neither priest nor clerk,
Me to destourbe of Cristes hooly werk.
To hinder me from (doing) Christ's holy work.
And after that thanne telle I forth my tales;
And after that then I tell forth my tales;
Bulles of popes and of cardynales,
Indulgences of popes and of cardinals,
Of patriarkes and bishopes I shewe,
Of patriarchs and bishops I show,
And in Latyn I speke a wordes fewe,
And in Latin I speak a few words,
To saffron with my predicacioun,
With which to add spice to my preaching,
And for to stire hem to devocioun.
And to stir them to devotion.
Thanne shewe I forth my longe cristal stones,
Then I show forth my long crystal stones,
Ycrammed ful of cloutes and of bones --
Crammed full of rags and of bones --
Relikes been they, as wenen they echoon.
Relics they are, as suppose they each one.
Thanne have I in latoun a sholder-boon
Then I have mounted in latten (brass-like alloy) a shoulder-bone
Which that was of an hooly Jewes sheep.
Which was of a holy Jew's sheep.
`Goode men,' I seye, `taak of my wordes keep;
`Good men,' I say, `take heed of my words;
If that this boon be wasshe in any welle,
If this bone be washed in any well,
If cow, or calf, or sheep, or oxe swelle
If cow, or calf, or sheep, or ox swell
That any worm hath ete, or worm ystonge,
That any worm has eaten, or worm stung,
Taak water of that welle and wassh his tonge,
Take water of that well and wash its tongue,
And it is hool anon; and forthermoore,
And it is whole right away; and furthermore,
Of pokkes and of scabbe, and every soore
Of pocks and of scab, and every sore
Shal every sheep be hool that of this welle
Every sheep shall be whole that of this well
Drynketh a draughte. Taak kep eek what I telle:
Drinks a draft. Take heed also what I say:
If that the good-man that the beestes oweth
If the householder who owns the beasts
Wol every wyke, er that the cok hym croweth,
Will every week, before the cock crows,
Fastynge, drynken of this welle a draughte,
Fasting, drink of this well a draft,
As thilke hooly Jew oure eldres taughte,
As that same holy Jew taught our elders,
His beestes and his stoor shal multiplie.
His beasts and his possessions shall multiply.
`And, sires, also it heeleth jalousie;
`And, sirs, it also heals jealousy;
For though a man be falle in jalous rage,
For though a man be fallen in jealous rage,
Lat maken with this water his potage,
Have his potage made with this water,
And nevere shal he moore his wyf mystriste,
And he shall never more mistrust his wife,
Though he the soothe of hir defaute wiste,
Though he knew the truth of her misdeed,
Al had she taken prestes two or thre.
Although she had taken two or three priests.
`Heere is a miteyn eek, that ye may se.
`Here is a mitten also, that you may see.
He that his hand wol putte in this mitayn,
He that will put his hand in this mitten,
He shal have multipliyng of his grayn,
He shall have multiplying of his grain,
Whan he hath sowen, be it whete or otes,
When he has sown, be it wheat or oats,
So that he offre pens, or elles grotes.
Providing that he offer pennies, or else fourpences.
`Goode men and wommen, o thyng warne I yow:
`Good men and women, one thing I warn you:
If any wight be in this chirche now
If any person be in this church now
That hath doon synne horrible, that he
Who has done such horrible sin, that he
Dar nat, for shame, of it yshryven be,
Dare not, for shame, be confessed of it,
Or any womman, be she yong or old,
Or any woman, be she young or old,
That hath ymaked hir housbonde cokewold,
Who has made her husband cuckold,
Swich folk shal have no power ne no grace
Such folk shall have no power nor no grace
To offren to my relikes in this place.
To offer to my relics in this place.
And whoso fyndeth hym out of swich blame,
And whoever finds himself out of such blame,
He wol come up and offre a Goddes name,
He will come up and offer in God's name,
And I assoille him by the auctoritee
And I will absolve him by the authority
Which that by bulle ygraunted was to me.'
Which by papal bull was granted to me.'
"By this gaude have I wonne, yeer by yeer,
"By this trick have I won, year after year,
An hundred mark sith I was pardoner.
An hundred marks since I was pardoner.
I stonde lyk a clerk in my pulpet,
I stand like a clerk in my pulpit,
And whan the lewed peple is doun yset,
And when the ignorant people are set down,
I preche so as ye han herd bifoore
I preach as you have heard before
And telle an hundred false japes moore.
And tell a hundred more false tales.
Thanne peyne I me to strecche forth the nekke,
Then I take pains to stretch forth the neck,
And est and west upon the peple I bekke,
And east and west upon the people I nod,
As dooth a dowve sittynge on a berne.
As does a dove sitting on a barn.
Myne handes and my tonge goon so yerne
My hands and my tongue go so quickly
That it is joye to se my bisynesse.
That it is joy to see my business.
Of avarice and of swich cursednesse
Of avarice and of such cursedness
Is al my prechyng, for to make hem free
Is all my preaching, to make them generous
To yeven hir pens, and namely unto me.
To give their pennies, and namely unto me.
For myn entente is nat but for to wynne,
For my intention is only to make a profit,
And nothyng for correccioun of synne.
And not at all for correction of sin.
I rekke nevere, whan that they been beryed,
I care not a bit, when they are buried,
Though that hir soules goon a-blakeberyed!
Though their souls go picking blackberries!
For certes, many a predicacioun
For certainly, many a sermon
Comth ofte tyme of yvel entencioun;
Comes often times from an evil intention;
Som for plesance of folk and flaterye,
Some for pleasure of folk and flattery,
To been avaunced by ypocrisye,
To be advanced by hypocrisy,
And som for veyne glorie, and som for hate.
And some for vain glory, and some for hate.
For whan I dar noon oother weyes debate,
For when I dare debate no other ways,
Thanne wol I stynge hym with my tonge smerte
Then I will sting him with my sharp tongue
In prechyng, so that he shal nat asterte
In preaching, so that he shall not escape
To been defamed falsly, if that he
To be defamed falsely, if he
Hath trespased to my bretheren or to me.
Has trespassed to my brethren or to me.
For though I telle noght his propre name,
For though I tell not his proper name,
Men shal wel knowe that it is the same,
Men shall well know that it is the same,
By signes, and by othere circumstances.
By signs, and by other details.
Thus quyte I folk that doon us displesances;
Thus I repay folk who make trouble for us pardoners;
Thus spitte I out my venym under hewe
Thus I spit out my venom under hue
Of hoolynesse, to semen hooly and trewe.
Of holinesses, to seem holy and true.
"But shortly myn entente I wol devyse:
"But shortly my intention I will tell:
I preche of no thyng but for coveityse.
I preach of nothing but for greed.
Therfore my theme is yet, and evere was,
Therefore my theme is yet, and ever was,
Radix malorum est Cupiditas.
`Greed is the root of all evil.'
Thus kan I preche agayn that same vice
Thus I can preach against that same vice
Which that I use, and that is avarice.
Which I use, and that is avarice.
But though myself be gilty in that synne,
But though myself be guilty of that sin,
Yet kan I maken oother folk to twynne
Yet I can make other folk to turn away
From avarice and soore to repente.
From avarice and bitterly to repent.
But that is nat my principal entente;
But that is not my principal intention;
I preche nothyng but for coveitise.
I preach nothing but for greed.
Of this mateere it oghte ynogh suffise.
Concerning this matter this ought to be enough.
"Thanne telle I hem ensamples many oon
"Then I tell them illustrative tales many a one
Of olde stories longe tyme agoon.
Of old stories from long time ago.
For lewed peple loven tales olde;
For ignorant people love old tales;
Swiche thynges kan they wel reporte and holde.
Such things they can well repeat and hold in memory.
What, trowe ye, that whiles I may preche,
What, do you suppose, that while I can preach,
And wynne gold and silver for I teche,
And win gold and silver because I teach,
That I wol lyve in poverte wilfully?
That I will live in poverty voluntarily?
Nay, nay, I thoghte it nevere, trewely!
Nay, nay, I never thought it, truly!
For I wol preche and begge in sondry landes;
For I will preach and beg in various lands;
I wol nat do no labour with myne handes,
I will not do any labor with my hands,
Ne make baskettes and lyve therby,
Nor make baskets and live thereby,
By cause I wol nat beggen ydelly.
Because I will not beg idly.
I wol noon of the apostles countrefete;
I will imitate none of the apostles;
I wol have moneie, wolle, chese, and whete,
I will have money, wool, cheese, and wheat,
Al were it yeven of the povereste page,
Although it were given by the poorest servant boy,
Or of the povereste wydwe in a village,
Or by the poorest widow in a village,
Al sholde hir children sterve for famyne.
Even though her children should die of hunger.
Nay, I wol drynke licour of the vyne
Nay, I will drink liquor of the vine
And have a joly wenche in every toun.
And have a pretty wench in every town.
But herkneth, lordynges, in conclusioun:
But listen, gentlemen, in conclusion:
Youre likyng is that I shal telle a tale.
Your desire is that I shall tell a tale.
Now have I dronke a draughte of corny ale,
Now I have drunk a draft of strong ale,
By God, I hope I shal yow telle a thyng
By God, I hope I shall tell you a thing
That shal by reson been at youre likyng.
That shall, for good reason, be to your liking.
For though myself be a ful vicious man,
For though myself be a very vicious man,
A moral tale yet I yow telle kan,
Yet I can tell you a moral tale,
Which I am wont to preche for to wynne.
Which I am accustomed to preach in order to profit.
Now hoold youre pees! My tale I wol bigynne."
Now hold your peace! My tale I will begin."
Heere bigynneth the Pardoners Tale.
Here begins the Pardoner's Tale.
In Flaundres whilom was a compaignye
In Flanders once was a company
Of yonge folk that haunteden folye,
Of young folk who practiced folly,
As riot, hasard, stywes, and tavernes,
Such as debauchery, gambling, brothels, and taverns,
Where as with harpes, lutes, and gyternes,
Where with harps, lutes, and guitars,
They daunce and pleyen at dees bothe day and nyght,
They dance and play at dice both day and night,
And eten also and drynken over hir myght,
And also eat and drink beyond their capacity,
Thurgh which they doon the devel sacrifise
Through which they do the devil sacrifice
Withinne that develes temple in cursed wise
Within that devil's temple in cursed manner
By superfluytee abhomynable.
By abominable excess.
Hir othes been so grete and so dampnable
Their oaths are so great and so damnable
That it is grisly for to heere hem swere.
That it is grisly to hear them swear.
Oure blissed Lordes body they totere --
Our blessed Lord's body they tore in pieces --
Hem thoughte that Jewes rente hym noght ynough --
They thought that the Jews did not tear him enough --
And ech of hem at otheres synne lough.
And each of them laughed at the other's sin.
And right anon thanne comen tombesteres
And right away then come dancing girls
Fetys and smale, and yonge frutesteres,
Elegantly shaped and slim, and girls selling fruits,
Syngeres with harpes, baudes, wafereres,
Singers with harps, bawds, girls selling wafers,
Whiche been the verray develes officeres
Which are the very devil's officers
To kyndle and blowe the fyr of lecherye,
To kindle and blow the fire of lechery,
That is annexed unto glotonye.
That is joined unto gluttony.
The hooly writ take I to my witnesse
The Bible I take as my witness
That luxurie is in wyn and dronkenesse.
That lechery is in wine and drunkenness.
Lo, how that dronken Looth, unkyndely,
Lo, how that drunken Lot, unnaturally,
Lay by his doghtres two, unwityngly;
Lay by his two daughters, unwittingly;
So dronke he was, he nyste what he wroghte.
So drunk he was, he knew not what he did.
Herodes, whoso wel the stories soghte,
Herod, whoever should seek well the histories (would learn),
Whan he of wyn was repleet at his feeste,
When he was filled with wine at his feast,
Right at his owene table he yaf his heeste
Right at his own table he gave his command
To sleen the Baptist John, ful giltelees.
To slay John the Baptist, full guiltless.
Senec seith a good word doutelees;
Seneca says a good word, doubtless;
He seith he kan no difference fynde
He says he can find no difference
Bitwix a man that is out of his mynde
Between a man that is out of his mind
And a man which that is dronkelewe,
And a man that is drunk,
But that woodnesse, yfallen in a shrewe,
Except that madness, fallen in an evil person,
Persevereth lenger than doth dronkenesse.
Lasts longer than does drunkenness.
O glotonye, ful of cursednesse!
O gluttony, full of cursedness!
O cause first of oure confusioun!
O first cause of our ruin!
O original of oure dampnacioun,
O origin of our damnation,
Til Crist hadde boght us with his blood agayn!
Until Christ had bought us with his blood again!
Lo, how deere, shortly for to sayn,
Lo, how dearly, shortly to say,
Aboght was thilke cursed vileynye!
Was bought that same cursed villainy!
Corrupt was al this world for glotonye.
Corrupt was all this world for gluttony.
Adam oure fader, and his wyf also,
Adam our fader, and his wife also,
Fro Paradys to labour and to wo
From Paradise to labor and to woe
Were dryven for that vice, it is no drede.
Were driven for that vice, there is no doubt.
For whil that Adam fasted, as I rede,
For while Adam fasted, as I read,
He was in Paradys; and whan that he
He was in Paradise; and when he
Eet of the fruyt deffended on the tree,
Ate of the forbidden fruit on the tree,
Anon he was out cast to wo and peyne.
Immediately he was cast out to woe and pain.
O glotonye, on thee wel oghte us pleyne!
O gluttony, on thee well we ought to complain!
O, wiste a man how manye maladyes
O, if a man knew how many evils
Folwen of excesse and of glotonyes,
Follow of excess and of gluttony,
He wolde been the moore mesurable
He would be the more moderate
Of his diete, sittynge at his table.
Of his diet, sitting at his table.
Allas, the shorte throte, the tendre mouth,
Alas, the short throat, the tender mouth,
Maketh that est and west and north and south,
Makes that east and west and north and south,
In erthe, in eir, in water, men to swynke
In earth, in air, in water, men work
To gete a glotoun deyntee mete and drynke!
To get a glutton dainty food and drink!
Of this matiere, O Paul, wel kanstow trete:
Of this matter, O Paul, well can thou treat
"Mete unto wombe, and wombe eek unto mete,
"Food unto belly, and belly also unto food,
Shal God destroyen bothe," as Paulus seith.
God shall destroy both," as Paul says.
Allas, a foul thyng is it, by my feith,
Alas, a foul thing it is, by my faith,
To seye this word, and fouler is the dede,
To say this word, and fouler is the deed,
Whan man so drynketh of the white and rede
When man so drinks of the white and red
That of his throte he maketh his pryvee
That he makes his privy of his throat
Thurgh thilke cursed superfluitee.
Through that same cursed excess.
The apostel wepyng seith ful pitously,
The apostle weeping says full piteously,
"Ther walken manye of whiche yow toold have I --
"There walk many of whom I have told you --
I seye it now wepyng, with pitous voys --
I say it now weeping, with piteous voice --
They been enemys of Cristes croys,
They are enemies of Christ's cross,
Of whiche the ende is deeth; wombe is hir god!"
Of which the end is death; belly is their god!"
O wombe! O bely! O stynkyng cod,
O gut! O belly! O stinking bag,
Fulfilled of dong and of corrupcioun!
Filled with dung and with corruption!
At either ende of thee foul is the soun.
At either end of thee the sound is foul.
How greet labour and cost is thee to fynde!
How great labor and cost it is to feed thee!
Thise cookes, how they stampe, and streyne, and grynde,
These cooks, how they pound, and strain, and grind,
And turnen substaunce into accident
And turn substance into outward appearance
To fulfille al thy likerous talent!
To fulfill all thy gluttonous desire!
Out of the harde bones knokke they
Out of the hard bones they knock
The mary, for they caste noght awey
The marrow, for they throw nothing away
That may go thurgh the golet softe and swoote.
That may go through the gullet softly and sweetly.
Of spicerie of leef, and bark, and roote
Of seasonings of leaf, and bark, and root
Shal been his sauce ymaked by delit,
Shall his sauce be made for delight,
To make hym yet a newer appetit.
To make him yet a newer appetite.
But, certes, he that haunteth swiche delices
But, certainly, he who habitually seeks such delicacies
Is deed, whil that he lyveth in tho vices.
Is dead, while he lives in those vices.
A lecherous thyng is wyn, and dronkenesse
A lecherous thing is wine, and drunkenness
Is ful of stryvyng and of wrecchednesse.
Is full of striving and of wretchedness.
O dronke man, disfigured is thy face,
O drunken man, disfigured is thy face,
Sour is thy breeth, foul artow to embrace,
Sour is thy breath, foul art thou to embrace,
And thurgh thy dronke nose semeth the soun
And through thy drunken nose the sound seems
As though thou seydest ay "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"
As though thou said always "Sampson, Sampson!"
And yet, God woot, Sampsoun drank nevere no wyn.
And yet, God knows, Sampson never drank any wine.
Thou fallest as it were a styked swyn;
Thou fallest like a stuck pig;
Thy tonge is lost, and al thyn honeste cure,
Thy tongue is lost, and all thy care for decency,
For dronkenesse is verray sepulture
For drunkenness is truly the sepulcher
Of mannes wit and his discrecioun.
Of man's wit and his discretion.
In whom that drynke hath dominacioun
In whom drink has domination
He kan no conseil kepe; it is no drede.
He can keep no secrets; there is no doubt.
Now kepe yow fro the white and fro the rede,
Now guard yourself from the white and from the red,
And namely fro the white wyn of Lepe
And namely from the white wine of Lepe
That is to selle in Fysshstrete or in Chepe.
That is for sale in Fishstreet or in Cheapside.
This wyn of Spaigne crepeth subtilly
This wine of Spain creeps subtly
In othere wynes, growynge faste by,
Into other wines, growing near by,
Of which ther ryseth swich fumositee
Of which there rise such bodily vapors
That whan a man hath dronken draughtes thre,
That when a man has drunk three drafts,
And weneth that he be at hoom in Chepe,
And supposes that he is at home in Cheapside,
He is in Spaigne, right at the toune of Lepe --
He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe --
Nat at the Rochele, ne at Burdeux toun --
Not at La Rochelle, nor at Bordeaux town --
And thanne wol he seye "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"
And then will he say "Sampson, Sampson!"
But herkneth, lordynges, o word, I yow preye,
But listen, gentlemen, one word, I pray you,
That alle the sovereyn actes, dar I seye,
That all the great deeds, I dare say,
Of victories in the Olde Testament,
Of victories in the Old Testament,
Thurgh verray God, that is omnipotent,
Through true God, who is omnipotent,
Were doon in abstinence and in preyere.
Were done in abstinence and in prayer.
Looketh the Bible, and ther ye may it leere.
Look in the Bible, and there you can learn it.
Looke, Attilla, the grete conquerour,
Consider how Attila, the great conqueror,
Deyde in his sleep, with shame and dishonour,
Died in his sleep, with shame and dishonor,
Bledynge ay at his nose in dronkenesse.
Bleeding ever at his nose in drunkenness.
A capitayn sholde lyve in sobrenesse.
A captain should live in sobriety.
And over al this, avyseth yow right wel
And beyond all this, consider right well
What was comaunded unto Lamuel --
What was commanded unto Lamuel --
Nat Samuel, but Lamuel, seye I;
Not Samuel, but Lamuel, I say;
Redeth the Bible, and fynde it expresly
Read the Bible, and find it explicitly
Of wyn-yevyng to hem that han justise.
About giving wine to those that have the duty of doing justice.
Namoore of this, for it may wel suffise.
No more of this, for it may well suffice.
And now that I have spoken of glotonye,
And now that I have spoken of gluttony,
Now wol I yow deffenden hasardrye.
Now I will forbid you gambling.
Hasard is verray mooder of lesynges,
Dicing is the true mother of lies,
And of deceite, and cursed forswerynges,
And of deceit, and cursed perjuries,
Blaspheme of Crist, manslaughtre, and wast also
Blasphemy of Christ, manslaughter, and waste also
Of catel and of tyme; and forthermo,
Of possessions and of time; and furthermore,
It is repreeve and contrarie of honour
It is a disgrace and contrary to honor
For to ben holde a commune hasardour.
To be considered a common dice player.
And ever the hyer he is of estaat,
And ever the higher he is of estate,
The moore is he yholden desolaat.
The more is he considered abandoned (to shame).
If that a prynce useth hasardrye,
If a prince plays at dicing,
In alle governaunce and policye
In all governance and policy
He is, as by commune opinioun,
He is, by common opinion,
Yholde the lasse in reputacioun.
Held the less in reputation.
Stilboun, that was a wys embassadour,
Stilboun, who was a wise ambassador,
Was sent to Corynthe in ful greet honour
Was sent to Corinth in very great honor
Fro Lacidomye to make hire alliaunce.
From Sparta to make their alliance.
And whan he cam, hym happede, par chaunce,
And when he came, it happened, by chance,
That alle the gretteste that were of that lond,
That all the greatest men that were of that land,
Pleyynge atte hasard he hem fond.
Playing at dice he found them.
For which, as soone as it myghte be,
For which, as soon as it could be,
He stal hym hoom agayn to his contree,
He stole home again to his country,
And seyde, "Ther wol I nat lese my name,
And said, "There I will not lose my reputation,
Ne I wol nat take on me so greet defame,
Nor will I take on me so great infamy,
Yow for to allie unto none hasardours.
To ally you unto any dice-players.
Sendeth othere wise embassadours;
Send other wise ambassadors;
For, by my trouthe, me were levere dye
For, by my troth, I would rather die
Than I yow sholde to hasardours allye.
Than I should ally you to dice-players.
For ye, that been so glorious in honours,
For you, that are so glorious in honors,
Shul nat allyen yow with hasardours
Shall not ally yourselves with dice-players
As by my wyl, ne as by my tretee."
By my will, nor by my negotiation."
This wise philosophre, thus seyde hee.
This wise philosopher, thus said he.
Looke eek that to the kyng Demetrius
Consider also that to the king Demetrius
The kyng of Parthes, as the book seith us,
The king of Parthia, as the book tells us,
Sente him a paire of dees of gold in scorn,
Sent him a pair of dice of gold in scorn,
For he hadde used hasard ther-biforn;
Because he had played at dicing before that;
For which he heeld his glorie or his renoun
For which he held his glory or his renown
At no value or reputacioun.
At no value or esteem.
Lordes may fynden oother maner pley
Lords may find other sorts of play
Honest ynough to dryve the day awey.
Respectable enough to pass the time.
Now wol I speke of othes false and grete
Now will I speak of oaths false and great
A word or two, as olde bookes trete.
A word or two, as old books treat them.
Gret sweryng is a thyng abhominable,
Great swearing is an abominable thing,
And fals sweryng is yet moore reprevable.
And false swearing is yet more worthy of reproof.
The heighe God forbad sweryng at al,
The high God forbad swearing at al,
Witnesse on Mathew; but in special
Witness on Matthew; but in special
Of sweryng seith the hooly Jeremye,
Of swearing says the holy Jeremiah,
"Thou shalt swere sooth thyne othes, and nat lye,
"Thou shall swear truly thine oaths, and not lie,
And swere in doom and eek in rightwisnesse";
And in judgement and also in righteousness";
But ydel sweryng is a cursednesse.
But idle swearing is a cursed thing.
Bihoold and se that in the firste table
Behold and see that in the first three
Of heighe Goddes heestes honurable,
Of high God's honorable commandments,
Hou that the seconde heeste of hym is this:
How the second of his commands is this:
"Take nat my name in ydel or amys."
"Take not my name in vain nor amiss."
Lo, rather he forbedeth swich sweryng
Lo, he forbids such swearing rather
Than homycide or many a cursed thyng;
Than homicide or many a cursed thing;
I seye that, as by ordre, thus it stondeth;
I say that, so far as order is concerned, thus it stands;
This knoweth, that his heestes understondeth,
He who understands his commandments knows this,
How that the seconde heeste of God is that.
How that is the second command of God.
And forther over, I wol thee telle al plat
And furthermore, I will tell thee flatly
That vengeance shal nat parten from his hous
That vengeance shall not part from his house
That of his othes is to outrageous.
Who of his oaths is too excessive.
"By Goddes precious herte," and "By his nayles,"
"By God's precious heart," and "By his nails,"
And "By the blood of Crist that is in Hayles,
And "By the blood of Christ that is in Hales Abbey,
Sevene is my chaunce, and thyn is cynk and treye!"
Seven is my number, and thine is five and three!"
"By Goddes armes, if thou falsly pleye,
"By God's arms, if thou falsely play,
This daggere shal thurghout thyn herte go!" --
This dagger shall go throughout thy heart!" --
This fruyt cometh of the bicched bones two,
This fruit comes of the two cursed dice,
Forsweryng, ire, falsnesse, homycide.
Perjury, anger, falseness, homicide.
Now, for the love of Crist, that for us dyde,
Now, for the love of Christ, who for us died,
Lete youre othes, bothe grete and smale.
Leave your oaths, both great and small.
But, sires, now wol I telle forth my tale.
But, sirs, now will I tell forth my tale.
Thise riotoures thre of whiche I telle,
These three rioters of whom I tell,
Longe erst er prime rong of any belle,
Long before prime rang of any bell,
Were set hem in a taverne to drynke,
Had set themselves in a tavern to drink,
And as they sat, they herde a belle clynke
And as they sat, they heard a bell clink
Biforn a cors, was caried to his grave.
Before a corpse, which was carried to its grave.
That oon of hem gan callen to his knave:
The one of them did call to his servant:
"Go bet," quod he, "and axe redily
"Go quickly," he said, "and ask at once
What cors is this that passeth heer forby;
What corpse is this that passes by here;
And looke that thou reporte his name weel."
And see that thou report his name correctly."
"Sire," quod this boy, "it nedeth never-a-deel;
"Sir," said this boy, "that is not at all necessary;
It was me toold er ye cam heer two houres.
It was told me two hours before you came here.
He was, pardee, an old felawe of youres,
He was, indeed, an old fellow of yours,
And sodeynly he was yslayn to-nyght,
And suddenly he was slain last night,
Fordronke, as he sat on his bench upright.
Completely drunk, as he sat on his bench upright.
Ther cam a privee theef men clepeth Deeth,
There came a stealthy thief men call Death,
That in this contree al the peple sleeth,
Who slays all the people in this country,
And with his spere he smoot his herte atwo,
And with his spear he struck his heart in two,
And wente his wey withouten wordes mo.
And went his way without more words.
He hath a thousand slayn this pestilence.
He has slain a thousand (during) this pestilence.
And, maister, er ye come in his presence,
And, master, before you come in his presence,
Me thynketh that it were necessarie
It seems to me that it would be necessary
For to be war of swich an adversarie.
To beware of such an adversary.
Beth redy for to meete hym everemoore;
Always be ready to meet him;
Thus taughte me my dame; I sey namoore."
Thus taught me my mother; I say no more."
"By Seinte Marie!" seyde this taverner,
"By Saint Mary!" said this tavern-keeper,
"The child seith sooth, for he hath slayn this yeer,
"The child says truth, for he has slain this year,
Henne over a mile, withinne a greet village,
Over a mile from here, within a great village,
Bothe man and womman, child, and hyne, and page;
Both man and woman, child, and laborer, and servant boy;
I trowe his habitacioun be there.
I suppose his habitation is there.
To been avysed greet wysdom it were,
It would be great wisdom to be forewarned,
Er that he dide a man a dishonour."
Before he did a man any harm."
"Ye, Goddes armes!" quod this riotour,
"Yea, God's arms!" said this rioter,
"Is it swich peril with hym for to meete?
"Is it such peril to meet with him?
I shal hym seke by wey and eek by strete,
I shall seek him by path-way and also by street (everywhere),
I make avow to Goddes digne bones!
I make a vow to God's honorable bones!
Herkneth, felawes, we thre been al ones;
Listen, fellows, we three are all agreed;
Lat ech of us holde up his hand til oother,
Let each of us hold up his hand to other,
And ech of us bicomen otheres brother,
And each of us become the others' brother,
And we wol sleen this false traytour Deeth.
And we will slay this false traitor Death.
He shal be slayn, he that so manye sleeth,
He shall be slain, he who slays so many,
By Goddes dignitee, er it be nyght!"
By God's dignity, before it be night!"
Togidres han thise thre hir trouthes plight
Together have these three pledged their troths
To lyve and dyen ech of hem for oother,
To live and die each of them for other,
As though he were his owene ybore brother.
As though he were his own born brother.
And up they stirte, al dronken in this rage,
And up they leaped, all drunken in this rage,
And forth they goon towardes that village
And forth they go towards that village
Of which the taverner hadde spoke biforn.
Of which the tavern-keeper had spoken before.
And many a grisly ooth thanne han they sworn,
And many a grisly oath then have they sworn,
And Cristes blessed body they torente --
And Christ's blessed body they tore to pieces --
Deeth shal be deed, if that they may hym hente!
Death shall be dead, if they can catch him!
Whan they han goon nat fully half a mile,
When they have gone not fully half a mile,
Right as they wolde han troden over a stile,
Right as they would have stepped over a fence,
An oold man and a povre with hem mette.
An old and poor man met with them.
This olde man ful mekely hem grette,
This old man full meekly greeted them,
And seyde thus, "Now, lordes, God yow see!"
And said thus, "Now, lords, may God look after you!"
The proudeste of thise riotoures three
The proudest of these three rioters
Answerde agayn, "What, carl, with sory grace!
Answered in reply, "What, churl, bad luck to you!
Why artow al forwrapped save thy face?
Why art thou all wrapped up except for thy face?
Why lyvestow so longe in so greet age?"
Why live thou so long in such old age?"
This olde man gan looke in his visage,
This old man did look in his face,
And seyde thus: "For I ne kan nat fynde
And said thus: "Because I can not find
A man, though that I walked into Ynde,
A man, though I walked to India,
Neither in citee ne in no village,
Neither in city nor in any village,
That wolde chaunge his youthe for myn age;
That would change his youth for my age;
And therfore moot I han myn age stille,
And therefore I must have my age still,
As longe tyme as it is Goddes wille.
As long a time as it is God's will.
Ne Deeth, allas, ne wol nat han my lyf.
Nor Death, alas, will not have my life.
Thus walke I, lyk a restelees kaityf,
Thus I walk, like a restless wretch,
And on the ground, which is my moodres gate,
And on the ground, which is my mother's gate,
I knokke with my staf, bothe erly and late,
I knock with my staff, both early and late,
And seye `Leeve mooder, leet me in!
And say `Dear mother, let me in!
Lo how I vanysshe, flessh, and blood, and skyn!
Lo how I waste away, flesh, and blood, and skin!
Allas, whan shul my bones been at reste?
Alas, when shall my bones be at rest?
Mooder, with yow wolde I chaunge my cheste
Mother, with you would I exchange my strongbox
That in my chambre longe tyme hath be,
That in my chamber long time has been,
Ye, for an heyre clowt to wrappe me!'
Yea, for an hair shirt to wrap me!'
But yet to me she wol nat do that grace,
But yet to me she will not do that favor,
For which ful pale and welked is my face.
For which full pale and withered is my face.
"But, sires, to yow it is no curteisye
"But, sirs, to you it is no courtesy
To speken to an old man vileynye,
To speak rudeness to an old man,
But he trespasse in word or elles in dede.
Unless he trespass in word or else in deed.
In Hooly Writ ye may yourself wel rede:
In Holy Writ you may yourself well read:
`Agayns an oold man, hoor upon his heed,
`In the presence of an old man, gray upon his head,
Ye sholde arise;' wherfore I yeve yow reed,
You should rise;' therefore I give you advice,
Ne dooth unto an oold man noon harm now,
Do no harm now unto an old man,
Namoore than that ye wolde men did to yow
No more than you would want men to do to you
In age, if that ye so longe abyde.
In old age, if you live so long.
And God be with yow, where ye go or ryde!
And God be with you, wherever you walk or ride!
I moot go thider as I have to go."
I must go thither where I have to go."
"Nay, olde cherl, by God, thou shalt nat so,"
"Nay, old churl, by God, thou shall not so,"
Seyde this oother hasardour anon;
Said this other dice-player quickly;
"Thou partest nat so lightly, by Seint John!
"Thou depart not so quickly, by Saint John!
Thou spak right now of thilke traytour Deeth.
Thou spoke right now of that same traitor Death.
That in this contree alle oure freendes sleeth.
That slays all our friends in this country.
Have heer my trouthe, as thou art his espye,
Have here my pledge, as thou art his spy,
Telle where he is or thou shalt it abye,
Tell where he is or thou shall pay for it,
By God and by the hooly sacrement!
By God and by the holy sacrament!
For soothly thou art oon of his assent
For truly thou art in league with him
To sleen us yonge folk, thou false theef!"
To slay us young folk, thou false thief!"
"Now, sires," quod he, "if that yow be so leef
"Now, sirs," said he, "if you are so eager
To fynde Deeth, turne up this croked wey,
To find Death, turn up this crooked way,
For in that grove I lafte hym, by my fey,
For in that grove I left him, by my faith,
Under a tree, and there he wole abyde;
Under a tree, and there he will wait;
Noght for youre boost he wole him no thyng hyde.
He will not in any way hide himself because of your boast.
Se ye that ook? Right there ye shal hym fynde.
Do you see that oak? Right there you shall find him.
God save yow, that boghte agayn mankynde,
God save you, He who redeemed mankind,
And yow amende!" Thus seyde this olde man;
And amend you!" Thus said this old man;
And everich of thise riotoures ran
And every one of these rioters ran
Til he cam to that tree, and ther they founde
Until he came to that tree, and there they found
Of floryns fyne of gold ycoyned rounde
Of fine round florins of coined gold
Wel ny an eighte busshels, as hem thoughte.
Well nigh eight bushels, as they thought.
No lenger thanne after Deeth they soughte,
No longer then after Death they sought,
But ech of hem so glad was of that sighte,
But each of them was so glad of that sight,
For that the floryns been so faire and brighte,
Because the florins are so faire and bright,
That doun they sette hem by this precious hoord.
That they set themselves down by this precious hoard.
The worste of hem, he spak the firste word.
The worst of them, he spoke the first word.
"Bretheren," quod he, "taak kep what that I seye;
"Brethren," he said, "take heed of what I say;
My wit is greet, though that I bourde and pleye.
My wit is great, though I jest and play.
This tresor hath Fortune unto us yiven
Fortune has given this treasure unto us
In myrthe and joliftee oure lyf to lyven,
In mirth and jollity to live our life,
And lightly as it comth, so wol we spende.
And as easily as it comes, so will we spend it.
Ey, Goddes precious dignitee! Who wende
Ah, God's precious dignity! Who would have supposed
To-day that we sholde han so fair a grace?
To-day that we should have such good fortune?
But myghte this gold be caried fro this place
But if this gold could be carried from this place
Hoom to myn hous, or elles unto youres --
Home to my house, or else unto yours --
For wel ye woot that al this gold is oures --
For well you know that all this gold is ours --
Thanne were we in heigh felicitee.
Then we would be in great happiness.
But trewely, by daye it may nat bee.
But truly, it may not be (done) by day.
Men wolde seyn that we were theves stronge,
Men would say that we were arrant thieves,
And for oure owene tresor doon us honge.
And for our own treasure have us hanged.
This tresor moste ycaried be by nyghte
This treasure must be carried by night
As wisely and as slyly as it myghte.
As wisely and as slyly as it can be.
Wherfore I rede that cut among us alle
Wherefore I advise that among us all straws
Be drawe, and lat se wher the cut wol falle;
Be drawn, and let's see where the lot will fall;
And he that hath the cut with herte blithe
And he who has the shortest straw with happy heart
Shal renne to the town, and that ful swithe,
Shall run to the town, and that very quickly,
And brynge us breed and wyn ful prively.
And very secretly bring us bread and wine.
And two of us shul kepen subtilly
And two of us shall carefully guard
This tresor wel; and if he wol nat tarie,
This treasure well; and if he will not tarry,
Whan it is nyght, we wol this tresor carie,
When it is night, we will carry this treasure,
By oon assent, where as us thynketh best."
By mutual agreement, where we think best."
That oon of hem the cut broghte in his fest,
That one of them brought the straws in his fist,
And bad hem drawe and looke where it wol falle;
And commanded them to draw and see where it will fall;
And it fil on the yongeste of hem alle,
And it fell on the youngest of them all,
And forth toward the toun he wente anon.
And forth toward the town he went right away.
And also soone as that he was gon,
And as soon as he was gone,
That oon of hem spak thus unto that oother:
The one of them spoke thus unto that other:
"Thow knowest wel thou art my sworen brother;
"Thou knowest well thou art my sworn brother;
Thy profit wol I telle thee anon.
Thy profit will I tell thee straightway.
Thou woost wel that oure felawe is agon.
Thou knowest well that our fellow is gone.
And heere is gold, and that ful greet plentee,
And here is gold, and that a full great quantity,
That shal departed been among us thre.
That shall be divided among us three.
But nathelees, if I kan shape it so
But nevertheless, if I can arrange things so
That it departed were among us two,
That it were divided among us two,
Hadde I nat doon a freendes torn to thee?"
Had I not done a good turn to thee?"
That oother answerde, "I noot hou that may be.
That other answered, "I know not how that can be.
He woot that the gold is with us tweye;
He knows that the gold is with us two;
What shal we doon? What shal we to hym seye?"
What shall we do? What shall we say to him?"
"Shal it be conseil?" seyde the firste shrewe,
"Shall it be (our) secret plan?" said the first scoundrel,
"And I shal tellen in a wordes fewe
"And I shall tell in a few words
What we shal doon, and brynge it wel aboute."
What we shall do, and bring it well about."
"I graunte," quod that oother, "out of doute,
"I agree," said that other, "without doubt,
That, by my trouthe, I wol thee nat biwreye."
That, by my troth, I will not betray thee."
"Now," quod the firste, "thou woost wel we be tweye,
"Now," said the first, "thou knowest well we are two,
And two of us shul strenger be than oon.
And two of us shall be stronger than one.
Looke whan that he is set, that right anoon
Look, when he has set down, right away
Arys as though thou woldest with hym pleye,
Arise as though thou would with him play,
And I shal ryve hym thurgh the sydes tweye
And I shall stab him through the two sides
Whil that thou strogelest with hym as in game,
While thou struggle with him as in game,
And with thy daggere looke thou do the same;
And with thy dagger see that thou do the same;
And thanne shal al this gold departed be,
And then shall all this gold be divided,
My deere freend, bitwixen me and thee.
My dear friend, between me and thee.
Thanne may we bothe oure lustes all fulfille,
Then we both can fulfill all our desires,
And pleye at dees right at oure owene wille."
And play at dice just as we wish,"
And thus acorded been thise shrewes tweye
And thus these two scoundrels are agreed
To sleen the thridde, as ye han herd me seye.
To slay the third, as you have heard me say.
This yongeste, which that wente to the toun,
This youngest, who went to the town,
Ful ofte in herte he rolleth up and doun
Very often in heart he rolls up and down
The beautee of thise floryns newe and brighte.
The beauty of these florins new and bright.
"O Lord!" quod he, "if so were that I myghte
"O Lord!" he said, "if it would be that I might
Have al this tresor to myself allone,
Have all this treasure to myself alone,
Ther is no man that lyveth under the trone
There is no man that lives under the throne
Of God that sholde lyve so murye as I!"
Of God that should live so merrily as I!"
And atte laste the feend, oure enemy,
And at the last the fiend, our enemy,
Putte in his thought that he sholde poyson beye,
Put in his thought that he should buy poison,
With which he myghte sleen his felawes tweye;
With which he might slay his two fellows;
For-why the feend foond hym in swich lyvynge
Because the fiend found him in such a manner of living
That he hadde leve him to sorwe brynge.
That he had leave bring him to sorrow.
For this was outrely his fulle entente,
For this was utterly his full intention,
To sleen hem bothe and nevere to repente.
To slay them both and never to repent.
And forth he gooth, no lenger wolde he tarie,
And forth he goes, no longer would he tarry,
Into the toun, unto a pothecarie,
Into the town, unto an apothecary,
And preyde hym that he hym wolde selle
And prayed him that he would sell him
Som poyson, that he myghte his rattes quelle;
Some poison, that he might kill his rats;
And eek ther was a polcat in his hawe,
And also there was a polecat in his yard,
That, as he seyde, his capouns hadde yslawe,
That, as he said, had slain his capons,
And fayn he wolde wreke hym, if he myghte,
And he would gladly revenge himself, if he could,
On vermyn that destroyed hym by nyghte.
On vermin that ruined him by night.
The pothecarie answerde, "And thou shalt have
The apothecary answered, "And thou shall have
A thyng that, also God my soule save,
A thing that, as God may save my soul,
In al this world ther is no creature
In all this world there is no creature
That eten or dronken hath of this confiture
That has eaten or drunk of this concoction
Noght but the montance of a corn of whete,
Only so much as the amount of a seed of wheat,
That he ne shal his lif anon forlete;
That he shall not immediately lose his life;
Ye, sterve he shal, and that in lasse while
Yea, he shall die, and that in less time
Than thou wolt goon a paas nat but a mile,
Than thou will go at a walk but only a mile,
This poysoun is so strong and violent."
This poison is so strong and violent."
This cursed man hath in his hond yhent
This cursed man has in his hand taken
This poysoun in a box, and sith he ran
This poison in a box, and then he ran
Into the nexte strete unto a man,
Into the next street unto a man,
And borwed [of] hym large botelles thre,
And borrowed [of] him three large bottles,
And in the two his poyson poured he;
And in the two he poured his poison;
The thridde he kepte clene for his drynke.
The third he kept clean for his drink.
For al the nyght he shoop hym for to swynke
For all the night he intended to work
In cariynge of the gold out of that place.
In carrying of the gold out of that place.
And whan this riotour, with sory grace,
And when this rioter, bad luck to him,
Hadde filled with wyn his grete botels thre,
Had filled his three big bottles with wine,
To his felawes agayn repaireth he.
He goes back again to his fellows.
What nedeth it to sermone of it moore?
What needs it to preach of it more?
For right as they hadde cast his deeth bifoore,
For right as they had planned his death before,
Right so they han hym slayn, and that anon.
Right so they have him slain, and that immediately.
And whan that this was doon, thus spak that oon:
And when this was done, thus spoke that one:
"Now lat us sitte and drynke, and make us merie,
"Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry,
And afterward we wol his body berie."
And afterward we will bury his body."
And with that word it happed hym, par cas,
And with that word it happened to him, by chance,
To take the botel ther the poyson was,
To take the bottle where the poison was,
And drank, and yaf his felawe drynke also,
And drank, and gave his fellow drink also,
For which anon they storven bothe two.
For which straightway they died, both of the two.
But certes, I suppose that Avycen
But certainly, I suppose that Avicenna
Wroot nevere in no canon, ne in no fen,
Wrote never in any authoritative book, nor in any chapter,
Mo wonder signes of empoisonyng
More wondrous symptoms of poisoning
Than hadde thise wrecches two, er hir endyng.
Than had these two wretches, before their ending.
Thus ended been thise homycides two,
Thus ended are these two homicides,
And eek the false empoysonere also.
And also the false poisoner as well.
O cursed synne of alle cursednesse!
O cursed sin of all cursedness!
O traytours homycide, O wikkednesse!
O treacherous homicide, O wickedness!
O glotonye, luxurie, and hasardrye!
O gluttony, lechery, and dicing!
Thou blasphemour of Crist with vileynye
Thou blasphemer of Christ with churlish speech
And othes grete, of usage and of pride!
And great oaths, out of habit and out of pride!
Allas, mankynde, how may it bitide
Alas, mankind, how may it happen
That to thy creatour, which that the wroghte
That to thy creator, who made thee
And with his precious herte-blood thee boghte,
And with his precious heart's blood redeemed thee,
Thou art so fals and so unkynde, allas?
Thou art so false and so unnatural, alas?
Now, goode men, God foryeve yow youre trespas,
Now, good men, God forgive you your trespass,
And ware yow fro the synne of avarice!
And guard yourselves from the sin of avarice!
Myn hooly pardoun may yow alle warice,
My holy pardon can cure you all,
So that ye offre nobles or sterlynges,
Providing that you offer gold coins or silver pennies,
Or elles silver broches, spoones, rynges.
Or else silver brooches, spoons, rings.
Boweth youre heed under this hooly bulle!
Bow your head under this holy papal bull!
Cometh up, ye wyves, offreth of youre wolle!
Come up, you wives, offer some of your wool!
Youre names I entre heer in my rolle anon;
Your names I enter here in my roll immediately;
Into the blisse of hevene shul ye gon.
Into the bliss of heaven you shall go.
I yow assoille, by myn heigh power,
I absolve you, by my high power,
Yow that wol offre, as clene and eek as cleer
You who will offer, as clean and also as clear (of sin)
As ye were born. -- And lo, sires, thus I preche.
As you were born. -- And lo, sirs, thus I preach.
And Jhesu Crist, that is oure soules leche,
And Jesus Christ, that is our souls' physician,
So graunte yow his pardoun to receyve,
So grant you to receive his pardon,
For that is best; I wol yow nat deceyve.
For that is best; I will not deceive you.
But, sires, o word forgat I in my tale:
But, sirs, one word I forgot in my tale:
I have relikes and pardoun in my male,
I have relics and pardons in my bag,
As faire as any man in Engelond,
As fine as any man in England,
Whiche were me yeven by the popes hond.
Which were given to me by the pope's hand.
If any of yow wole, of devocion,
If any of you will, of devotion,
Offren and han myn absolucion,
Offer and have my absolution,
Com forth anon, and kneleth heere adoun,
Come forth straightway, and kneel down here,
And mekely receyveth my pardoun;
And meekly receive my pardon;
Or elles taketh pardoun as ye wende,
Or else take pardon as you travel,
Al newe and fressh at every miles ende,
All new and fresh at every mile's end,
So that ye offren, alwey newe and newe,
Providing that you offer, again and again,
Nobles or pens, whiche that be goode and trewe.
Gold coins or silver pennies, which are good and true.
It is an honour to everich that is heer
It is an honor to every one that is here
That ye mowe have a suffisant pardoneer
That you may have a pardoner with sufficient power
T' assoille yow in contree as ye ryde,
To absolve you in the countryside as you ride,
For aventures whiche that may bityde.
For accidents that may happen.
Paraventure ther may fallen oon or two
Perhaps there may fall one or two
Doun of his hors and breke his nekke atwo.
Down off his horse and break his neck in two.
Looke which a seuretee is it to yow alle
Look what a safeguard is it to you all
That I am in youre felaweshipe yfalle,
That I happen to be in your fellowship,
That may assoille yow, bothe moore and lasse,
Who can absolve you, both more and less (every one),
Whan that the soule shal fro the body passe.
When the soul shall from the body pass.
I rede that oure Hoost heere shal bigynne,
I advise that our Host here shall begin,
For he is moost envoluped in synne.
For he is most enveloped in sin.
Com forth, sire Hoost, and offre first anon,
Come forth, sir Host, and offer first right now,
And thou shalt kisse the relikes everychon,
And thou shall kiss the relics every one,
Ye, for a grote! Unbokele anon thy purs."
Yea, for a fourpence coin! Unbuckle thy purse right now."
"Nay, nay!" quod he, "thanne have I Cristes curs!
"Nay, nay!" he said, "then I will have Christ's curse!
Lat be," quod he, "it shal nat be, so theech!
Let it be," he said, "it shall not be, as I may prosper!
Thou woldest make me kisse thyn olde breech,
Thou would make me kiss thine old underpants,
And swere it were a relyk of a seint,
And swear it was a relic of a saint,
Though it were with thy fundement depeint!
Though it were stained by thy fundament!
But, by the croys which that Seint Eleyne fond,
But, by the cross that Saint Helen found,
I wolde I hadde thy coillons in myn hond
I would I had thy testicles in my hand
In stide of relikes or of seintuarie.
Instead of relics or a container for relics.
Lat kutte hem of, I wol thee helpe hem carie;
Have them cut off, I will help thee carry them;
They shul be shryned in an hogges toord!"
They shall be enshrined in a hog's turd!"
This Pardoner answerde nat a word;
This Pardoner answered not a word;
So wrooth he was, no word ne wolde he seye.
So angry he was, no word would he say.
"Now," quod oure Hoost, "I wol no lenger pleye
"Now," said our Host, "I will no longer joke
With thee, ne with noon oother angry man."
With thee, nor with any other angry man."
But right anon the worthy Knyght bigan,
But immediately the worthy Knight began,
Whan that he saugh that al the peple lough,
When he saw that all the people laughed,
"Namoore of this, for it is right ynough!
"No more of this, for it is right enough!
Sire Pardoner, be glad and myrie of cheere;
Sir Pardoner, be glad and merry of cheer;
And ye, sire Hoost, that been to me so deere,
And you, sir Host, who are so dear to me,
I prey yow that ye kisse the Pardoner.
I pray you that you kiss the Pardoner.
And Pardoner, I prey thee, drawe thee neer,
And Pardoner, I pray thee, draw thyself nearer,
And, as we diden, lat us laughe and pleye."
And, as we did, let us laugh and play."
Anon they kiste, and ryden forth hir weye.
At once they kissed, and rode forth their way.
