The Prologue of the Nonnes Preestes Tale.
The Prologue of the Nuns and Priests Tale.
"Hoo!" quod the Knyght, "good sire, namoore of this!
"Whoa!" said the Knight, "good sire, no more of this!
That ye han seyd is right ynough, ywis,
What you have said is quite enough, indeed,
And muchel moore; for litel hevynesse
And much more; for a little sadness
Is right ynough to muche folk, I gesse.
Is quite enough for many people, I guess.
I seye for me, it is a greet disese,
I say for myself, it is a great distress,
Whereas men han been in greet welthe and ese,
When men have been in great wealth and ease,
To heeren of hire sodeyn fal, allas!
To hear of their sudden fall, alas!
And the contrarie is joye and greet solas,
And the contrary is joy and great comfort,
As whan a man hath been in povre estaat,
As when a man has been in a poor condition,
And clymbeth up and wexeth fortunat,
And climbs up and becomes fortunate,
And there abideth in prosperitee.
And there remains in prosperity.
Swich thyng is gladsom, as it thynketh me,
Such a thing is pleasing, as it seems to me,
And of swich thyng were goodly for to telle."
And of such a thing it would be good to tell."
"Ye," quod oure Hooste, "by Seint Poules belle!
"Yea," said our Host, "by Saint Paul's bell!
Ye seye right sooth; this Monk he clappeth lowde.
You say the very truth; this Monk he chatters noisily.
He spak how Fortune covered with a clowde
He spoke of how Fortune covered with a cloud
I noot nevere what; and als of a tragedie
I know not what; and also of a tragedy
Right now ye herde, and pardee, no remedie
Just now you heard, and by God, no remedy
It is for to biwaille ne compleyne
Is it to bewail or lament
That that is doon, and als it is a peyne,
That which is done, and also it is a pain,
As ye han seyd, to heere of hevynesse.
As you have said, to hear of sadness.
"Sire Monk, namoore of this, so God yow blesse!
"Sir Monk, no more of this, as God may you bless!
Youre tale anoyeth al this compaignye.
Your tale annoys all this company.
Swich talkyng is nat worth a boterflye,
Such talking is not worth a butterfly,
For therinne is ther no desport ne game.
For in it there is no pleasure nor amusement.
Wherfore, sire Monk, daun Piers by youre name,
Therefore, Sir Monk, dan Piers by your name,
I pray yow hertely telle us somwhat elles;
I pray yow earnestly tell us something else;
For sikerly, nere clynkyng of youre belles
For truly, were it not for the clinking of your bells
That on youre bridel hange on every syde,
That on your bridle hang on every side,
By hevene kyng that for us alle dyde,
By heaven's King who for us all died,
I sholde er this han fallen doun for sleep,
I should before this have fallen down because of sleepiness,
Althogh the slough had never been so deep;
Although the mud had never been so deep;
Thanne hadde your tale al be toold in veyn.
Then had your tale been told all in vain.
For certeinly, as that thise clerkes seyn,
For certainly, as these clerks say,
Whereas a man may have noon audience,
Where a man may have no hearers,
Noght helpeth it to tellen his sentence.
It is no use to tell his opinion.
"And wel I woot the substance is in me,
"And well I know the capacity of appreciation is in me,
If any thyng shal wel reported be.
If any thing shall be well told.
Sir, sey somwhat of huntyng, I yow preye."
Sir, say something about hunting, I you pray."
"Nay," quod this Monk, "I have no lust to pleye.
"Nay," said this Monk, "I have no desire to play.
Now lat another telle, as I have toold."
Now let another tell, as I have told."
Thanne spak oure Hoost with rude speche and boold,
Then spoke oure Host with rude speech and bold,
And seyde unto the Nonnes Preest anon,
And said unto the Nun's Priest straightway,
"Com neer, thou preest, com hyder, thou sir John!
"Come near, thou priest, come hither, thou sir John!
Telle us swich thyng as may oure hertes glade.
Tell us such thing as may our hearts gladden.
Be blithe, though thou ryde upon a jade.
Be happy, though thou ride upon a nag.
What thogh thyn hors be bothe foul and lene?
What if thy horse be both poor and lean?
If he wol serve thee, rekke nat a bene.
If he will serve thee, care not a bean.
Looke that thyn herte be murie everemo."
See that thy heart be merry evermore."
"Yis, sir," quod he, "yis, Hoost, so moot I go,
"Yes indeed, sir," said he, "yes indeed, Host, as I may I prosper,
But I be myrie, ywis I wol be blamed."
Unless I be merry, indeed I will be blamed."
And right anon his tale he hath attamed,
And right away his tale he has begun,
And thus he seyde unto us everichon,
And thus he said unto us every one,
This sweete preest, this goodly man sir John.
This sweet priest, this goodly man sir John.
A povre wydwe, somdeel stape in age,
A poor widow, somewhat advanced in age,
Was whilom dwellyng in a narwe cotage,
Was once dwelling in a small cottage,
Biside a grove, stondynge in a dale.
Beside a grove, standing in a dale.
This wydwe, of which I telle yow my tale,
This widow, of whom I tell you my tale,
Syn thilke day that she was last a wyf
Since that same day that she was last a wife
In pacience ladde a ful symple lyf,
In patience led a very simple life,
For litel was hir catel and hir rente.
For little was her possessions and her income.
By housbondrie of swich as God hire sente
By husbandry of such as God sent her
She foond hirself and eek hir doghtren two.
She provided for herself and also her two daughters.
Thre large sowes hadde she, and namo,
She had three large sows, and no more,
Three keen, and eek a sheep that highte Malle.
Three cows, and also a sheep that is called Malle.
Ful sooty was hire bour and eek hir halle,
Full sooty was her bedchamber and also her hall,
In which she eet ful many a sklendre meel.
In which she ate very many a scanty meal.
Of poynaunt sauce hir neded never a deel.
She needed not a bit of spicy sauce.
No deyntee morsel passed thurgh hir throte;
No dainty morsel passed through her throat;
Hir diete was accordant to hir cote.
Her diet was such as her farm produced.
Repleccioun ne made hire nevere sik;
Overeating never made her sick;
Attempree diete was al hir phisik,
Moderate diet was all her medical treatment,
And exercise, and hertes suffisaunce.
And exercise, and a contented heart.
The goute lette hire nothyng for to daunce,
The gout not at all prevented her from dancing,
N' apoplexie shente nat hir heed.
And apoplexy harmed not her head.
No wyn ne drank she, neither whit ne reed;
No wine she drank, neither white nor red;
Hir bord was served moost with whit and blak --
Her board was provided mostly with white and black --
Milk and broun breed, in which she foond no lak,
Milk and dark bread, in which she found no lack,
Seynd bacoun, and somtyme an ey or tweye,
Broiled bacon, and sometimes an egg or two,
For she was, as it were, a maner deye.
For she was, as it were, a sort of dairywoman.
A yeerd she hadde, enclosed al aboute
She had a yard, enclosed all around
With stikkes, and a drye dych withoute,
With sticks, and a dry ditch outside it,
In which she hadde a cok, hight Chauntecleer.
In which she had a cock, called Chauntecleer.
In al the land, of crowyng nas his peer.
In all the land, there was not his peer in crowing.
His voys was murier than the murie orgon
His voice was merrier than the merry organ
On messe-dayes that in the chirche gon.
That goes in the church on mass-days.
Wel sikerer was his crowyng in his logge
Well more accurate was his crowing in his lodge
Than is a clokke or an abbey orlogge.
Than is a clock or an abbey timepiece.
By nature he knew ech ascencioun
By nature he knew (the hour of) each ascension
Of the equynoxial in thilke toun;
Of the celestial equator in that same town;
For whan degrees fiftene weren ascended,
For when degrees fifteen were ascended,
Thanne crew he that it myghte nat been amended.
Then he crowed so that it could not be improved.
His coomb was redder than the fyn coral,
His comb was redder than the fine coral,
And batailled as it were a castel wal;
And notched with battlements as if it were a castle wall;
His byle was blak, and as the jeet it shoon;
His bill was black, and it shone like the jet stone;
Lyk asure were his legges and his toon;
Like azure were his legs and his toes;
His nayles whitter than the lylye flour,
His nails whiter than the lily flour,
And lyk the burned gold was his colour.
And like the burnished gold was his color.
This gentil cok hadde in his governaunce
This gentle cock had in his governance
Sevene hennes for to doon al his plesaunce,
Seven hens to do all his pleasure,
Whiche were his sustres and his paramours,
Which were his sisters and his concubines,
And wonder lyk to hym, as of colours;
And wonderfully like him, in their colors;
Of whiche the faireste hewed on hir throte
Of which the fairest colored on her throat
Was cleped faire damoysele Pertelote.
Was called fair demoiselle Pertelote.
Curteys she was, discreet, and debonaire,
Courteous she was, discreet, and gracious,
And compaignable, and bar hyrself so faire
And companionable, and bore herself so fair
Syn thilke day that she was seven nyght oold
Since that same day that she was seven nights old
That trewely she hath the herte in hoold
That truly she has in possession the heart
Of Chauntecleer, loken in every lith;
Of Chauntecleer, locked in every limb (completely);
He loved hire so that wel was hym therwith.
He loved her so that well was him because of that.
But swich a joye was it to here hem synge,
But such a joy it was to hear them sing,
Whan that the brighte sonne gan to sprynge,
When the bright sun began to spring,
In sweete accord, "My lief is faren in londe!" --
In sweet accord, "My love has gone to the country!" --
For thilke tyme, as I have understonde,
For in that same time, as I have understood,
Beestes and briddes koude speke and synge.
Beasts and birds could speak and sing.
And so bifel that in a dawenynge,
And so befell that in a dawning,
As Chauntecleer among his wyves alle
As Chauntecleer among all his wives
Sat on his perche, that was in the halle,
Sat on his perch, that was in the hall,
And next hym sat this faire Pertelote,
And next to him sat this faire Pertelote,
This Chauntecleer gan gronen in his throte,
This Chauntecleer began to groan in his throat,
As man that in his dreem is drecched soore.
As one that in his dream is deeply troubled.
And whan that Pertelote thus herde hym roore,
And when Pertelote thus heard him roar,
She was agast and seyde, "Herte deere,
She was aghast and said, "Dear heart,
What eyleth yow, to grone in this manere?
What ails you, to groan in this manner?
Ye been a verray sleper; fy, for shame!"
You are a true (sound) sleeper; fie, for shame!"
And he answerde, and seyde thus: "Madame,
And he answered, and said thus: "Madame,
I pray yow that ye take it nat agrief.
I pray you that you take it not amiss.
By God, me mette I was in swich meschief
By God, I dreamed I was in such mischief
Right now that yet myn herte is soore afright.
Right now that yet my heart is grievously frightened.
Now God," quod he, "my swevene recche aright,
Now God," said he, "interpret my dream correctly,
And kepe my body out of foul prisoun!
And keep my body out of foul prison!
Me mette how that I romed up and doun
I dreamed how I roamed up and down
Withinne our yeerd, wheer as I saugh a beest
Within our yard, where I saw a beast
Was lyk an hound, and wolde han maad areest
Was like a hound, and would have seized
Upon my body, and wolde han had me deed.
Upon my body, and would have had me dead.
His colour was bitwixe yelow and reed,
His color was between yellow and red,
And tipped was his tayl and bothe his eeris
And tipped was his tail and both his ears
With blak, unlyk the remenant of his heeris;
With black, unlike the rest of his hair;
His snowte smal, with glowynge eyen tweye.
His snout small, with two glowing eyes.
Yet of his look for feere almoost I deye;
Yet for fear of his look I almost die;
This caused me my gronyng, doutelees."
This caused my groaning, doubtless."
"Avoy!" quod she, "fy on yow, hertelees!
"Shame!" said she, "fie on you, coward!
Allas," quod she, "for, by that God above,
Alas," said she, "for, by that God above,
Now han ye lost myn herte and al my love!
Now have you lost my heart and all my love!
I kan nat love a coward, by my feith!
I can not love a coward, by my faith!
For certes, what so any womman seith,
For certainly, whatever any woman says,
We alle desiren, if it myghte bee,
We all desire, if it might be,
To han housbondes hardy, wise, and free,
To have husbands hardy, wise, and generous,
And secree -- and no nygard, ne no fool,
And secret -- and no miser, nor no fool,
Ne hym that is agast of every tool,
Nor him who is afraid of every weapon,
Ne noon avauntour, by that God above!
Nor any boaster, by that God above!
How dorste ye seyn, for shame, unto youre love
How dare you say, for shame, unto your love
That any thyng myghte make yow aferd?
That any thing might make you afraid?
Have ye no mannes herte, and han a berd?
Have you no man's heart, and have a beard?
Allas! And konne ye been agast of swevenys?
Alas! And can you be frightened of dreams?
Nothyng, God woot, but vanitee in sweven is.
Nothing, God knows, but foolishness is in dreams.
Swevenes engendren of replecciouns,
Dreams are produced by overeating,
And ofte of fume and of complecciouns,
And often by stomach vapors and by the mixture of bodily humors,
Whan humours been to habundant in a wight.
When humors are too abundant in a person.
Certes this dreem, which ye han met to-nyght,
Certainly this dream, which you have dreamed to-night,
Cometh of the greete superfluytee
Comes of the great superfluity
Of youre rede colera, pardee,
Of your red choleric humor, indeed,
Which causeth folk to dreden in hir dremes
Which causes folk in their dreams to be afraid
Of arwes, and of fyr with rede lemes,
Of arrows, and of fire with red flames,
Of rede beestes, that they wol hem byte,
Of red beasts, (fearing) that they will bite them,
Of contek, and of whelpes, grete and lyte;
Of strife, and of dogs, big and little;
Right as the humour of malencolie
Right as the humor of melancholy
Causeth ful many a man in sleep to crie
Causes very many a man in sleep to cry
For feere of blake beres, or boles blake,
For fear of black bears, or black bulls,
Or elles blake develes wole hem take.
Or else black devils will take them.
Of othere humours koude I telle also
Of other humors could I tell also
That werken many a man sleep ful wo;
That cause many a man much woe (in) sleep;
But I wol passe as lightly as I kan.
But I will pass over as lightly as I can.
"Lo Catoun, which that was so wys a man,
"Lo Cato, who was so wise a man,
Seyde he nat thus, `Ne do no fors of dremes'?
Said he not thus, `Attach no importance to dreams'?
"Now sire," quod she, "whan we flee fro the bemes,
"Now sir," said she, "when we fly from the beams,
For Goddes love, as taak som laxatyf.
For God's love, take some laxative.
Up peril of my soule and of my lyf,
Upon peril of my soul and of my life,
I conseille yow the beste -- I wol nat lye --
I counsel you the best -- I will not lie --
That bothe of colere and of malencolye
That both of choler and of melancholy
Ye purge yow; and for ye shal nat tarie,
You purge yourself; and so that you shall not delay,
Though in this toun is noon apothecarie,
Though in this town is no apothecary,
I shal myself to herbes techen yow
I shall myself guide you to herbs
That shul been for youre hele and for youre prow;
That shall be for your health and for your benefit;
And in oure yeerd tho herbes shal I fynde
And in our yard I shall find those herbs
The whiche han of hire propretee by kynde
The which by nature have the power
To purge yow bynethe and eek above.
To purge you beneath and also above.
Foryet nat this, for Goddes owene love!
Forget not this, for God's own love!
Ye been ful coleryk of compleccioun;
You are dominated by the choleric humor;
Ware the sonne in his ascencioun
Beware the sun when it is high in the sky
Ne fynde yow nat repleet of humours hoote.
And do not find yourself with an excess of hot humors.
And if it do, I dar wel leye a grote,
And if there be an excess, I dare well bet four pence,
That ye shul have a fevere terciane,
That you shall have a fever recurring every three days,
Or an agu that may be youre bane.
Or an ague that may be your death.
A day or two ye shul have digestyves
A day or two you shall have digestives
Of wormes, er ye take youre laxatyves
Of worms, before you take your laxatives
Of lawriol, centaure, and fumetere,
Of spurge laurel, centaury, and fumitory,
Or elles of ellebor, that groweth there,
Or else of hellebore, that grows there,
Of katapuce, or of gaitrys beryis,
Of caper-spurge, or of rhamus,
Of herbe yve, growyng in oure yeerd, ther mery is;
Of ground ivy, growing in our yard, where it is pleasant;
Pekke hem up right as they growe and ete hem yn.
Peck them up right as they grow and eat them in.
Be myrie, housbonde, for youre fader kyn!
Be merry, husband, for your father's kin!
Dredeth no dreem; I kan sey yow namoore."
Dread no dream; I can say you no more."
"Madame," quod he, "graunt mercy of youre loore.
"Madame," said he, "great thanks for your learning.
But nathelees, as touchyng daun Catoun,
But nonetheless, as touching dan Cato,
That hath of wysdom swich a greet renoun,
That has of wisdom such a great renown,
Though that he bad no dremes for to drede,
Though he commanded (us) to dread no dreams,
By God, men may in olde bookes rede
By God, men may in old books read
Of many a man moore of auctorite
Of many a man of more authority
Than evere Caton was, so moot I thee,
Than Cato ever was, as I may prosper,
That al the revers seyn of this sentence,
Who say all the reverse of this sentence,
And han wel founden by experience
And have well found by experience
That dremes been significaciouns
That dreams are significations
As wel of joye as of tribulaciouns
As well of joy as of tribulations
That folk enduren in this lif present.
That folk endure in this present life.
Ther nedeth make of this noon argument;
There need be no argument about this;
The verray preeve sheweth it in dede.
The proof itself shows it in the deed.
"Oon of the gretteste auctour that men rede
"One of the greatest author that men read
Seith thus: that whilom two felawes wente
Says thus: that once two fellows went
On pilgrimage, in a ful good entente,
On pilgrimage, with a very good intention,
And happed so, they coomen in a toun
And it so happened, they came in a town
Wher as ther was swich congregacioun
Where there was such a gathering
Of peple, and eek so streit of herbergage,
Of people, and also such a scantiness of lodging,
That they ne founde as muche as o cotage
That they found not so much as one cottage
In which they bothe myghte ylogged bee.
In which they both might be lodged.
Wherfore they mosten of necessitee,
Therefore they must of necessity,
As for that nyght, departen compaignye;
For that night, part company;
And ech of hem gooth to his hostelrye,
And each of them goes to his hostelry,
And took his loggyng as it wolde falle.
And took his lodging as it would befall.
That oon of hem was logged in a stalle,
The one of them was lodged in a stall,
Fer in a yeerd, with oxen of the plough;
Far in a yard, with oxen of the plough;
That oother man was logged wel ynough,
That other man was lodged well enough,
As was his aventure or his fortune,
As was his adventure or his fortune,
That us governeth alle as in commune.
Which us governs all in common.
"And so bifel that, longe er it were day,
"And it so befell that, long before it was day,
This man mette in his bed, ther as he lay,
This man dreamed in his bed, where he lay,
How that his felawe gan upon hym calle,
How his fellow began to call upon him,
And seyde, `Allas, for in an oxes stalle
And said, `Alas, for in an oxen's stall
This nyght I shal be mordred ther I lye!
This night I shall be murdered where I lie!
Now help me, deere brother, or I dye.
Now help me, dear brother, or I die.
In alle haste com to me!' he sayde.
In all haste come to me!' he said.
This man out of his sleep for feere abrayde;
This man out of his sleep for fear awakened suddenly;
But whan that he was wakened of his sleep,
But when he was wakened of his sleep,
He turned hym and took of this no keep.
He turned himself and took no heed of this.
Hym thoughte his dreem nas but a vanitee.
He thought his dream was nothing but a fantasy.
Thus twies in his slepyng dremed hee;
Thus twice in his sleeping he dreamed;
And atte thridde tyme yet his felawe
And at third time yet his fellow
Cam, as hym thoughte, and seide, `I am now slawe.
Came, as it seemed to him, and said, `I am now slain.
Bihoold my bloody woundes depe and wyde!
Behold my bloody wounds deep and wide!
Arys up erly in the morwe tyde,
Arise up early in the morning time,
And at the west gate of the toun,' quod he,
And at the west gate of the town,' he said,
`A carte ful of dong ther shaltow se,
`A cart full of dung there shalt thou see,
In which my body is hid ful prively;
In which my body is hid very secretly;
Do thilke carte arresten boldely.
Have that same cart immediately seized.
My gold caused my mordre, sooth to sayn,'
My gold caused my murder, to say the truth,'
And tolde hym every point how he was slayn,
And told him in full detail how he was slain,
With a ful pitous face, pale of hewe.
With a very piteous face, pale of hue.
And truste wel, his dreem he foond ful trewe,
And trust well, his dream he found very true,
For on the morwe, as soone as it was day,
For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,
To his felawes in he took the way;
To his fellow's inn he took the way;
And whan that he cam to this oxes stalle,
And when he came to this oxen's stall,
After his felawe he bigan to calle.
After his fellow he began to call.
"The hostiler answerede hym anon,
"The innkeeper answered him straightway,
And seyde, `Sire, your felawe is agon.
And said, `Sir, your fellow is gone.
As soone as day he wente out of the toun.'
As soon as it was day he went out of the town.'
"This man gan fallen in suspecioun,
"This man began to fall in suspicion,
Remembrynge on his dremes that he mette,
Remembering his dreams that he dreamed,
And forth he gooth -- no lenger wolde he lette --
And forth he goes -- no longer would he delay --
Unto the west gate of the toun, and fond
Unto the west gate of the town, and found
A dong-carte, wente as it were to donge lond,
A dung-cart, which went as if it were to dung land,
That was arrayed in that same wise
That was drawn up in that same manner
As ye han herd the dede man devyse.
As you have heard the dead man tell.
And with an hardy herte he gan to crye
And with a hardy heart he began to cry for
Vengeance and justice of this felonye:
Vengeance and justice of this felony:
`My felawe mordred is this same nyght,
`My fellow is murdered this same night,
And in this carte he lith gapyng upright.
And in this cart he lies gaping upright.
I crye out on the ministres,' quod he,
I cry out on the officials,' said he,
`That sholden kepe and reulen this citee.
`Who should guard and rule this city.
Harrow! Allas! Heere lith my felawe slayn!'
Help! Alas! Here lies my fellow slain!'
What sholde I moore unto this tale sayn?
What should I more unto this tale say?
The peple out sterte and caste the cart to grounde,
The people rushed out and cast the cart to ground,
And in the myddel of the dong they founde
And in the middle of the dung they found
The dede man, that mordred was al newe.
The dead man, who was just recently murdered.
"O blisful God, that art so just and trewe,
"O blissful God, that art so just and true,
Lo, how that thou biwreyest mordre alway!
Lo, how thou always reveal murder!
Mordre wol out; that se we day by day.
Murder will out; we see that day by day.
Mordre is so wlatsom and abhomynable
Murder is so disgusting and abominable
To God, that is so just and resonable,
To God, who is so just and reasonable,
That he ne wol nat suffre it heled be,
That He will not suffer it to be hidden,
Though it abyde a yeer, or two, or thre.
Though it may wait a year, or two, or three.
Mordre wol out, this my conclusioun.
Murder will out, this is my conclusion.
And right anon, ministres of that toun
And immediately, officials of that town
Han hent the carter and so soore hym pyned,
Have seized the carter and so painfully tortured him,
And eek the hostiler so soore engyned,
And also the hosteller so grievously tortured,
That they biknewe hire wikkednesse anon,
That they straightway acknowledged their wickedness,
And were anhanged by the nekke-bon.
And were hanged by the neck-bone.
"Heere may men seen that dremes been to drede.
"Here men may seen that dreams are to be feared.
And certes in the same book I rede,
And certainly in the same book I read,
Right in the nexte chapitre after this --
Right in the next chapter after this --
I gabbe nat, so have I joye or blis --
I do not lie, as I may have joy or bliss --
Two men that wolde han passed over see,
Two men that would have passed over see,
For certeyn cause, into a fer contree,
For a certain reason, into a far country,
If that the wynd ne hadde been contrarie,
If that the wind had not been contrary,
That made hem in a citee for to tarie
That made them to tarry in a city
That stood ful myrie upon an haven-syde;
That stood very merrily upon an haven-side;
But on a day, agayn the even-tyde,
But on a day, toward the evening time,
The wynd gan chaunge, and blew right as hem leste.
The wind began to change, and blew exactly as they desired.
Jolif and glad they wente unto hir reste,
Jolly and glad they went unto their rest,
And casten hem ful erly for to saille.
And they planned to sail very early.
But herkneth! To that o man fil a greet mervaille:
But listen! To that one man befell a great marvel:
That oon of hem, in slepyng as he lay,
The one of them, in sleeping as he lay,
Hym mette a wonder dreem agayn the day.
He dreamed a wondrous dream before the day.
Hym thoughte a man stood by his beddes syde,
He thought a man stood by his bed's side,
And hym comanded that he sholde abyde,
And commanded him that he should stay,
And seyde hym thus: `If thou tomorwe wende,
And said to him thus: `If thou travel tomorrow,
Thow shalt be dreynt; my tale is at an ende.'
Thou shalt be drowned; my tale is at an end.'
He wook, and tolde his felawe what he mette,
He woke, and told his fellow what he dreamed,
And preyde hym his viage for to lette;
And prayed him to delay his voyage;
As for that day, he preyde hym to byde.
For that day, he prayed him to wait.
His felawe, that lay by his beddes syde,
His fellow, that lay by his bed's side,
Gan for to laughe, and scorned him ful faste.
Began to laugh, and vigorously scorned him.
`No dreem,' quod he, `may so myn herte agaste
`No dream,' said he, `may so frighten my heart
That I wol lette for to do my thynges.
That I will desist from doing my tasks.
I sette nat a straw by thy dremynges,
I set not a straw by (put no value on) thy dreams,
For swevenes been but vanytees and japes.
For dreams are but fantasies and foolishness.
Men dreme alday of owles and of apes,
Men dream all the time of owls and of apes,
And of many a maze therwithal;
And of many a source of amazement indeed;
Men dreme of thyng that nevere was ne shal.
Men dream of a thing that never was nor shall be.
But sith I see that thou wolt heere abyde,
But since I see that thou will remain here,
And thus forslewthen wilfully thy tyde,
And thus willfully waste thy tide,
God woot, it reweth me; and have good day!'
God knows, it makes me sorry; and have good day!'
And thus he took his leve, and wente his way.
And thus he took his leave, and went his way.
But er that he hadde half his cours yseyled,
But before he had sailed half his course,
Noot I nat why, ne what myschaunce it eyled,
I know not why, nor what mischance harmed it,
But casuelly the shippes botme rente,
But by chance the ship's bottom broke open,
And ship and man under the water wente
And ship and man went under the water
In sighte of othere shippes it bisyde,
In sight of other ships beside it,
That with hem seyled at the same tyde.
That with them sailed on the same tide.
And therfore, faire Pertelote so deere,
And therefore, faire Pertelote so dear,
By swiche ensamples olde maistow leere
By such old examples thou may learn
That no man sholde been to recchelees
That no man should be too heedless
Of dremes; for I seye thee, doutelees,
Of dreams; for I say to thee, doubtless,
That many a dreem ful soore is for to drede.
That many a dream is very greatly to be feared.
"Lo, in the lyf of Seint Kenelm I rede,
"Lo, I read in the life of Saint Kenelm,
That was Kenulphus sone, the noble kyng
That was son of Kenulphus, the noble king
Of Mercenrike, how Kenelm mette a thyng.
Of Mercia, how Kenelm dreamed a thing.
A lite er he was mordred, on a day,
A little before he was murdered, on a day,
His mordre in his avysioun he say.
He saw his murder in his vision.
His norice hym expowned every deel
His nurse completely explained to him
His sweven, and bad hym for to kepe hym weel
His dream, and ordered him to guard himself well
For traisoun; but he nas but seven yeer oold,
From treason; but he was only seven years old,
And therfore litel tale hath he toold
And therefore he put little store
Of any dreem, so hooly was his herte.
In any dream, so holy was his heart.
By God! I hadde levere than my sherte
By God! I had rather than my shirt (give my shirt)
That ye hadde rad his legende, as have I.
That you had read his legend, as have I.
"Dame Pertelote, I sey yow trewely,
"Dame Pertelote, I say you truly,
Macrobeus, that writ the avisioun
Macrobius, that wrote the vision
In Affrike of the worthy Cipioun,
In Africa of the worthy Scipio,
Affermeth dremes, and seith that they been
Affirms (the value of) dreams, and says that they are
Warnynge of thynges that men after seen.
Warnings of things that men later see (come to pass)
And forthermoore, I pray yow, looketh wel
And furthermore, I pray you, look well
In the olde testament, of Daniel,
In the Old Testament, concerning Daniel,
If he heeld dremes any vanitee.
If he held dreams (to be) any foolishness.
Reed eek of Joseph, and ther shul ye see
Read also of Joseph, and there shall you see
Wher dremes be somtyme -- I sey nat alle --
Whether dreams are sometimes -- I say not all --
Warnynge of thynges that shul after falle.
Warnings of things that shall afterward befall.
Looke of Egipte the kyng, daun Pharao,
Consider the king of Egypt, dan Pharaoh,
His bakere and his butiller also,
His baker and his butler also,
Wher they ne felte noon effect in dremes.
Whether or not they felt any effect in dreams.
Whoso wol seken actes of sondry remes
Whoever will seek out the histories of various nations
May rede of dremes many a wonder thyng.
May read many a wonderful thing about dreams.
Lo Cresus, which that was of Lyde kyng,
Lo Croesus, who was king of Lydia,
Mette he nat that he sat upon a tree,
Dreamed he not that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified he sholde anhanged bee?
Which signified he should be hanged?
Lo heere Andromacha, Ectores wyf,
Lo here Andromacha, Hector's wife,
That day that Ector sholde lese his lyf,
That day that Hector should lose his life,
She dremed on the same nyght biforn
She dreamed on the same night before
How that the lyf of Ector sholde be lorn,
How the life of Hector should be lost,
If thilke day he wente into bataille.
If that same day he went into battle.
She warned hym, but it myghte nat availle;
She warned him, but it might not avail;
He wente for to fighte natheles,
He went to fight nonetheless,
But he was slayn anon of Achilles.
But he was slain straightway by Achilles.
But thilke tale is al to longe to telle,
But that same tale is all too long to tell,
And eek it is ny day; I may nat dwelle.
And also it is nigh day; I may not delay.
Shortly I seye, as for conclusioun,
Shortly I say, as for conclusion,
That I shal han of this avisioun
That I shall have of this vision
Adversitee; and I seye forthermoor
Adversity; and I say furthermore
That I ne telle of laxatyves no stoor,
That I put no store in laxatives,
For they been venymes, I woot it weel;
For they are poisonous, I know it well;
I hem diffye, I love hem never a deel!
I renounce them, I love them not at all!
"Now let us speke of myrthe, and stynte al this.
"Now let us speak of mirth, and stop all this.
Madame Pertelote, so have I blis,
Madame Pertelote, as I may have bliss,
Of o thyng God hath sent me large grace;
Of one thing God has sent me a great favor;
For whan I se the beautee of youre face,
For when I see the beauty of your face,
Ye been so scarlet reed aboute youre yen,
You are so scarlet red about your eyes,
It maketh al my drede for to dyen;
It makes all my dread die;
For al so siker as In principio,
For as surely as `In the beginning,
Mulier est hominis confusio --
`Woman is the ruin of man --'
Madame, the sentence of this Latyn is,
Madame, the meaning of this Latin is,
`Womman is mannes joye and al his blis.'
`Woman is man's joy and all his bliss.'
For whan I feele a-nyght your softe syde --
For when I feel at night your soft side --
Al be it that I may nat on yow ryde,
Although I can not on you ride,
For that oure perche is maad so narwe, allas --
Because our perch is made so narrow, alas --
I am so ful of joye and of solas,
I am so full of joy and of pleasure,
That I diffye bothe sweven and dreem."
That I renounce both vision and dream."
And with that word he fley doun fro the beem,
And with that word he flew down from the beam,
For it was day, and eke his hennes alle,
For it was day, and also all his hens,
And with a chuk he gan hem for to calle,
And with a cluck he began to call them,
For he hadde founde a corn, lay in the yerd.
Because he had found a seed, which lay in the yard.
Real he was, he was namoore aferd.
Royal he was, he was no longer afraid.
He fethered Pertelote twenty tyme,
He embraced Pertelote twenty times,
And trad hire eke as ofte, er it was pryme.
And copulated with her also as often, before it was  a.m..
He looketh as it were a grym leoun,
He looks as if he were a grim lion,
And on his toos he rometh up and doun;
And on his toes he roams up and down;
Hym deigned nat to sette his foot to grounde.
He deigned not to set his foot to ground.
He chukketh whan he hath a corn yfounde,
He clucks when he has found a seed,
And to hym rennen thanne his wyves alle.
And then his wives all run to him.
Thus roial, as a prince is in his halle,
Thus royal, as a prince is in his hall,
Leve I this Chauntecleer in his pasture,
Leave I this Chauntecleer in his feeding place,
And after wol I telle his aventure.
And after I will tell his adventure.
Whan that the month in which the world bigan,
When the month in which the world began,
That highte March, whan God first maked man,
Which is called March, when God first made man,
Was compleet, and passed were also,
Was complete, and passed were also,
Syn March [was gon], thritty dayes and two,
Since March had gone, thirty days and two,
Bifel that Chauntecleer in al his pryde,
Befell that Chauntecleer in all his pride,
His sevene wyves walkynge by his syde,
His seven wives walking by his side,
Caste up his eyen to the brighte sonne,
Cast up his eyes to the bright sun,
That in the signe of Taurus hadde yronne
That in the sign of Taurus had run
Twenty degrees and oon, and somwhat moore,
Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more,
And knew by kynde, and by noon oother loore,
And knew by nature, and by none other knowledge,
That it was pryme, and crew with blisful stevene.
That it was prime, and crowed with blissful voice.
"The sonne," he seyde, "is clomben up on hevene
"The sun," he said, "has climbed up on heaven
Fourty degrees and oon, and moore ywis.
Forty degrees and one, and more indeed.
Madame Pertelote, my worldes blis,
Madame Pertelote, my world's bliss,
Herkneth thise blisful briddes how they synge,
Listen to these blissful birds, how they sing,
And se the fresshe floures how they sprynge;
And see the fresh flowers, how they spring;
Ful is myn herte of revel and solas!"
My heart is full of revel and pleasure!"
But sodeynly hym fil a sorweful cas,
But suddenly to him befell a sorrowful situation,
For evere the latter ende of joye is wo.
For ever the latter end of joy is woe.
God woot that worldly joye is soone ago;
God knows that worldly joy is soon gone;
And if a rethor koude faire endite,
And if a rhetorician could fairly compose,
He in a cronycle saufly myghte it write
He in a chronicle confidently could write it
As for a sovereyn notabilitee.
As a supremely important fact.
Now every wys man, lat him herkne me;
Now every wise man, let him listen to me;
This storie is also trewe, I undertake,
This story is as true, I declare,
As is the book of Launcelot de Lake,
As is the Book of Lancelot of the Lake,
That wommen holde in ful greet reverence.
Which women hold in very great reverence.
Now wol I torne agayn to my sentence.
Now will I turn again to my subject matter.
A col-fox, ful of sly iniquitee,
A fox, full of sly iniquity,
That in the grove hadde woned yeres three,
That in the grove had dwelled three years,
By heigh ymaginacioun forncast,
By exalted imagination predestined,
The same nyght thurghout the hegges brast
The same night through the hedges broke
Into the yerd ther Chauntecleer the faire
Into the yard where the handsome Chauntecleer
Was wont, and eek his wyves, to repaire;
Was accustomed, and also his wives, to repair;
And in a bed of wortes stille he lay
And in a bed of cabbages he lay quietly
Til it was passed undren of the day,
Until it had passed  a.m. of the day,
Waitynge his tyme on Chauntecleer to falle,
Waiting his time on Chauntecleer to fall,
As gladly doon thise homycides alle
As habitually do all these homicides
That in await liggen to mordre men.
That in ambush lie to murder men.
O false mordrour, lurkynge in thy den!
O false murderer, lurking in thy den!
O newe Scariot, newe Genylon,
O new Judas Iscariot, new Genylon,
False dissymulour, o Greek Synon,
False deceiver, O Greek Synon,
That broghtest Troye al outrely to sorwe!
That brought all Troy completely to sorrow!
O Chauntecleer, acursed be that morwe
O Chauntecleer, cursed be that morning
That thou into that yerd flaugh fro the bemes!
That thou flew from the beams into that yard!
Thou were ful wel ywarned by thy dremes
Thou were very well warned by thy dreams
That thilke day was perilous to thee;
That that same day was perilous to thee;
But what that God forwoot moot nedes bee,
But what God knows beforehand must by necessity be,
After the opinioun of certein clerkis.
According to the opinion of certain scholars.
Witnesse on hym that any parfit clerk is,
Take witness of him that is a thoroughly competent scholar,
That in scole is greet altercacioun
That in the university is great disagreement
In this mateere, and greet disputisoun,
In this matter, and great disputation,
And hath been of an hundred thousand men.
And has been (disputed) by a hundred thousand men.
But I ne kan nat bulte it to the bren
But I can not separate the valid and invalid arguments
As kan the hooly doctour Augustyn,
As can the holy doctor Augustine,
Or Boece, or the Bisshop Bradwardyn,
Or Boethius, or the Bishop Bradwardyn,
Wheither that Goddes worthy forwityng
Whether God's worthy foreknowledge
Streyneth me nedely for to doon a thyng --
Constrains me by need to do a thing --
"Nedely" clepe I symple necessitee --
"Need" I call simple necessity --
Or elles, if free choys be graunted me
Or else, if free choice be granted to me
To do that same thyng, or do it noght,
To do that same thing, or do it not,
Though God forwoot it er that I was wroght;
Though God knew it before I was born;
Or if his wityng streyneth never a deel
Or if his knowledge constrains not at all
But by necessitee condicioneel.
But by conditional necessity.
I wol nat han to do of swich mateere;
I will not have to do with such matter;
My tale is of a cok, as ye may heere,
My tale is of a cock, as you may hear,
That tok his conseil of his wyf, with sorwe,
Who took his counsel from his wife, with sorrow,
To walken in the yerd upon that morwe
To walk in the yard upon that morning
That he hadde met that dreem that I yow tolde.
That he had dreamed that dream of which I told you.
Wommennes conseils been ful ofte colde;
Women's counsels are very often fatal;
Wommannes conseil broghte us first to wo
Woman's counsel brought us first to woe
And made Adam fro Paradys to go,
And made Adam to go from Paradise,
Ther as he was ful myrie and wel at ese.
Where he was very merry and well at ease.
But for I noot to whom it myght displese,
But because I know not to whom it might displease,
If I conseil of wommen wolde blame,
If I would blame counsel of women,
Passe over, for I seyde it in my game.
Pass over, for I said it as a joke.
Rede auctours, where they trete of swich mateere,
Read authors, where they treat of such matter,
And what they seyn of wommen ye may heere.
And what they say of women you may hear.
Thise been the cokkes wordes, and nat myne;
These are the cock's words, and not mine;
I kan noon harm of no womman divyne.
I know no harm of any woman divine.
Faire in the soond, to bathe hire myrily,
Fair in the sand, to bathe her merrily,
Lith Pertelote, and alle hire sustres by,
Lies Pertelote, and all her sisters by her,
Agayn the sonne, and Chauntecleer so free
In the sunshine, and Chauntecleer so noble
Soong murier than the mermayde in the see
Sang more merrily than the mermaid in the sea
(For Phisiologus seith sikerly
(For Phisiologus says surely
How that they syngen wel and myrily).
How they sing well and merrily).
And so bifel that, as he caste his ye
And so befell that, as he cast his eye
Among the wortes on a boterflye,
On a butterfly among the cabbages,
He was war of this fox, that lay ful lowe.
He was aware of this fox, that lay very low.
Nothyng ne liste hym thanne for to crowe,
Not at all then did he want to crow,
But cride anon, "Cok! cok!" and up he sterte
But cried straightway, "Cock! cock!" and up he leaped
As man that was affrayed in his herte.
As one that was frightened in his heart.
For natureelly a beest desireth flee
For naturally a beast desires to flee
Fro his contrarie, if he may it see,
From his natural opponent, if he may see it,
Though he never erst hadde seyn it with his ye.
Though he never before had seen it with his eye.
This Chauntecleer, whan he gan hym espye,
This Chauntecleer, when he did espy him,
He wolde han fled, but that the fox anon
He would have fled, but that the fox straightway
Seyde, "Gentil sire, allas, wher wol ye gon?
Said, "Gentle sir, alas, where will you go?
Be ye affrayed of me that am youre freend?
Are you afraid of me who is your friend?
Now, certes, I were worse than a feend,
Now, certainly, I would be worse than a fiend,
If I to yow wolde harm or vileynye!
If I to you would do harm or villainy!
I am nat come youre conseil for t' espye,
I am not come to spy on your secrets,
But trewely, the cause of my comynge
But truly, the cause of my coming
Was oonly for to herkne how that ye synge.
Was only to hear how you sing.
For trewely, ye have as myrie a stevene
For truly, you have as merry a voice
As any aungel hath that is in hevene.
As has any angel that is in heaven.
Therwith ye han in musyk moore feelynge
Therewith you have in music more feeling
Than hadde Boece, or any that kan synge.
Than had Boethius, or any that knows how to sing.
My lord youre fader -- God his soule blesse! --
My lord your father -- God bless his soul! --
And eek youre mooder, of hire gentillesse,
And also your mother, of her graciousness,
Han in myn hous ybeen to my greet ese;
Have been in my house to my great pleasure;
And certes, sire, ful fayn wolde I yow plese.
And certainly, sir, I would very eagerly please you.
But, for men speke of syngyng, I wol seye --
But, insofar as men speak of singing, I will say --
So moote I brouke wel myne eyen tweye --
As I may well have use of my two eyes --
Save yow, I herde nevere man so synge
Except for you, I heard never man so sing
As dide youre fader in the morwenynge.
As did your father in the morning.
Certes, it was of herte, al that he song.
Certainly, it came from the heart, all that he sang.
And for to make his voys the moore strong,
And to make his voice the more strong,
He wolde so peyne hym that with bothe his yen
He would so exert himself that with both his eyes
He moste wynke, so loude he wolde cryen,
He had to wink, so loud he would cry,
And stonden on his tiptoon therwithal,
And stand on his tiptoes simultaneously,
And strecche forth his nekke long and smal.
And stretch forth his neck long and small.
And eek he was of swich discrecioun
And also he was of such sound judgment
That ther nas no man in no regioun
That there was no man in any region
That hym in song or wisedom myghte passe.
That might pass him in song or wisdom.
I have wel rad in `Daun Burnel the Asse,'
I have well read in `Dan Burnel the Ass,'
Among his vers, how that ther was a cok,
Among his verses, how there was a cock,
For that a preestes sone yaf hym a knok
Because a priest's son gave him a knock
Upon his leg whil he was yong and nyce,
Upon his leg while he was young and foolish,
He made hym for to lese his benefice.
He made him lose his benefice.
But certeyn, ther nys no comparisoun
But certainly, there is no comparison
Bitwixe the wisedom and discrecioun
Between the wisdom and discretion
Of youre fader and of his subtiltee.
Of your father and of his subtlety.
Now syngeth, sire, for seinte charitee;
Now sing, sir, for Saint Charity;
Lat se; konne ye youre fader countrefete?"
Let's see; can you imitate your father?"
This Chauntecleer his wynges gan to bete,
This Chauntecleer began to beat his wings,
As man that koude his traysoun nat espie,
As one that could not espy his treason,
So was he ravysshed with his flaterie.
He was so ravished with his flattery.
Allas, ye lordes, many a fals flatour
Alas, you lords, many a false flatterer
Is in youre courtes, and many a losengeour,
Is in your courts, and many a sycophant,
That plesen yow wel moore, by my feith,
Who please you well more, by my faith,
Than he that soothfastnesse unto yow seith.
Than he who says the truth unto you.
Redeth Ecclesiaste of flaterye;
Read Ecclesiastes about flattery;
Beth war, ye lordes, of hir trecherye.
Beware, you lords, of their treachery.
This Chauntecleer stood hye upon his toos,
This Chauntecleer stood high upon his toes,
Strecchynge his nekke, and heeld his eyen cloos,
Stretching his neck, and held his eyes closed,
And gan to crowe loude for the nones.
And began to crow loud for the occasion.
And daun Russell the fox stirte up atones,
And dan Russell the fox leaped up at once,
And by the gargat hente Chauntecleer,
And grabbed Chauntecleer by the throat,
And on his bak toward the wode hym beer,
And carried him on his back toward the woods,
For yet ne was ther no man that hym sewed.
For yet there was no one that pursued him.
O destinee, that mayst nat been eschewed!
O destiny, that may not be escaped!
Allas, that Chauntecleer fleigh fro the bemes!
Alas, that Chauntecleer flew from the beams!
Allas, his wyf ne roghte nat of dremes!
Alas, his wife took no heed of dreams!
And on a Friday fil al this meschaunce.
And on a Friday befell all this misfortune.
O Venus, that art goddesse of plesaunce,
O Venus, who art goddess of pleasure,
Syn that thy servant was this Chauntecleer,
Since this Chauntecleer was thy servant,
And in thy servyce dide al his poweer,
And in thy service did all his power,
Moore for delit than world to multiplye,
More for delight than to people the world,
Why woldestow suffre hym on thy day to dye?
Why wouldest thou allow him to die on thy day?
O Gaufred, deere maister soverayn,
O Gaufred, dear supreme master,
That whan thy worthy kyng Richard was slayn
Who when thy worthy king Richard was slain
With shot, compleynedest his deeth so soore,
By shot of an arrow, complained his death so grievously,
Why ne hadde I now thy sentence and thy loore,
Why had I not now thy wisdom and thy learning,
The Friday for to chide, as diden ye?
To chide the Friday, as you did?
For on a Friday, soothly, slayn was he.
For on a Friday, truly, he was slain.
Thanne wolde I shewe yow how that I koude pleyne
Then would I show you how that I could complain
For Chauntecleres drede and for his peyne.
For Chanticleer's dread and for his pain.
Certes, swich cry ne lamentation
Certainly, such cry nor lamentation
Was nevere of ladyes maad whan Ylion
Was never made by ladies when Ilion (Troy)
Was wonne, and Pirrus with his streite swerd,
Was won, and Pirrus with his drawn sword,
Whan he hadde hent kyng Priam by the berd,
When he had seized king Priam by the beard,
And slayn hym, as seith us Eneydos,
And slain him, as the Aeneid tells us,
As maden alle the hennes in the clos,
As all the hens made in the yard,
Whan they had seyn of Chauntecleer the sighte.
When they had seen the sight of Chauntecleer.
But sovereynly dame Pertelote shrighte
But supremely dame Pertelote shrieked
Ful louder than dide Hasdrubales wyf,
Much louder than did Hasdrubales' wife,
Whan that hir housbonde hadde lost his lyf
When her husband had lost his life
And that the Romayns hadde brend Cartage.
And the Romans had burned Carthage.
She was so ful of torment and of rage
She was so full of torment and of rage
That wilfully into the fyr she sterte
That willfully into the fire she leaped
And brende hirselven with a stedefast herte.
And burned herself with a steadfast heart.
O woful hennes, right so criden ye
O woeful hens, exactly so you cried
As whan that Nero brende the citee
As when Nero burned the city
Of Rome cryden senatoures wyves
Of Rome senators' wives cried
For that hir husbondes losten alle hir lyves --
Because their husbands lost all their lives --
Withouten gilt this Nero hath hem slayn.
Without guilt this Nero has them slain.
Now wole I turne to my tale agayn.
Now will I turn to my tale again.
This sely wydwe and eek hir doghtres two
This poor widow and also her two daughters
Herden thise hennes crie and maken wo,
Heard these hens cry and make woe,
And out at dores stirten they anon,
And out at doors they rush anon,
And syen the fox toward the grove gon,
And see the fox go toward the grove,
And bar upon his bak the cok away,
And carried the cock away upon his back,
And cryden, "Out! Harrow and weylaway!
And cried, "Help! Help and alas!
Ha, ha! The fox!" and after hym they ran,
Ha, ha! The fox!" and after him they ran,
And eek with staves many another man.
And also with staves many another man.
Ran Colle oure dogge, and Talbot and Gerland,
Ran Colle our dog, and Talbot and Gerland,
And Malkyn, with a dystaf in hir hand;
And Malkyn, with a distaff in her hand;
Ran cow and calf, and eek the verray hogges,
Ran cow and calf, and also the very hogs,
So fered for the berkyng of the dogges
So frightened for the barking of the dogs
And shoutyng of the men and wommen eeke
And shouting of the men and women also
They ronne so hem thoughte hir herte breeke.
They ran so hard that they thought their hearts would break.
They yolleden as feendes doon in helle;
They yelled as fiends do in hell;
The dokes cryden as men wolde hem quelle;
The ducks cried as if men would them kill;
The gees for feere flowen over the trees;
The geese for fear flew over the trees;
Out of the hyve cam the swarm of bees.
Out of the hive came the swarm of bees.
So hydous was the noyse -- a, benedicitee! --
So hideous was the noise -- a, bless me! --
Certes, he Jakke Straw and his meynee
Certainly, he Jack Straw and his company
Ne made nevere shoutes half so shrille
Never made shouts half so shrill
Whan that they wolden any Flemyng kille,
When they would any Fleming kill,
As thilke day was maad upon the fox.
As that same day was made upon the fox.
Of bras they broghten bemes, and of box,
They brought trumpets of brass, and of box-wood,
Of horn, of boon, in whiche they blewe and powped,
Of horn, of bone, in which they blew and puffed,
And therwithal they skriked and they howped.
And with that they shrieked and they whooped.
It semed as that hevene sholde falle.
It seemed as if heaven should fall.
Now, goode men, I prey yow herkneth alle:
Now, good men, I pray you all to listen:
Lo, how Fortune turneth sodeynly
Lo, how Fortune turns suddenly
The hope and pryde eek of hir enemy!
The hope and pride also of her enemy!
This cok, that lay upon the foxes bak,
This cock, that lay upon the fox's back,
In al his drede unto the fox he spak,
In all his dread unto the fox he spoke,
And seyde, "Sire, if that I were as ye,
And said, "Sir, if I were you,
Yet sholde I seyn, as wys God helpe me,
Yet should I say, as God may help me,
`Turneth agayn, ye proude cherles alle!
`Turn again, all you proud churls!
A verray pestilence upon yow falle!
May a true pestilence fall upon you!
Now I am come unto the wodes syde;
Now I am come unto the wood's side;
Maugree youre heed, the cok shal heere abyde.
Despite all you could do, the cock shall here remain.
I wol hym ete, in feith, and that anon!'"
I will eat him, in faith, and that right away!'"
The fox answerde, "In feith, it shal be don."
The fox answered, "In faith, it shall be done."
And as he spak that word, al sodeynly
And as he spoke that word, all suddenly
This cok brak from his mouth delyverly,
This cock nimbly broke from his mouth,
And heighe upon a tree he fleigh anon.
And high upon a tree he quickly flew.
And whan the fox saugh that the cok was gon,
And when the fox saw that the cock was gone,
"Allas!" quod he, "O Chauntecleer, allas!
"Alas!" said he, "O Chauntecleer, alas!
I have to yow," quod he, "ydoon trespas,
I have to you," said he, "done offense,
In as muche as I maked yow aferd
In as much as I made you afraid
Whan I yow hente and broghte out of the yerd.
When I seized you and brought you out of the yard.
But, sire, I dide it in no wikke entente.
But, sir, I did it with no wicked intention.
Com doun, and I shal telle yow what I mente;
Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant;
I shal seye sooth to yow, God help me so!"
I shall say the truth to you, as God may help me!"
"Nay thanne," quod he, "I shrewe us bothe two.
"Nay then," said he, "I curse both of us two.
And first I shrewe myself, bothe blood and bones,
And first I curse myself, both blood and bones,
If thou bigyle me ofter than ones.
If thou trick me more often than once.
Thou shalt namoore thurgh thy flaterye
Thou shalt no more through thy flattery
Do me to synge and wynke with myn ye;
Make me sing and close my eyes;
For he that wynketh, whan he sholde see,
For he that closes his eyes, when he should see,
Al wilfully, God lat him nevere thee!"
All willfully, God let him never prosper!"
"Nay," quod the fox, "but God yeve hym meschaunce,
"Nay," said the fox, "but God give him misfortune,
That is so undiscreet of governaunce
Who is so indiscreet of governance
That jangleth whan he sholde holde his pees."
That he chatters when he should hold his peace."
Lo, swich it is for to be recchelees
Lo, such it is to be careless
And necligent, and truste on flaterye.
And negligent, and trust on flattery.
But ye that holden this tale a folye,
But you who hold this tale a folly,
As of a fox, or of a cok and hen,
As of a fox, or of a cock and hen,
Taketh the moralite, goode men.
Take the morality, good men.
For Seint Paul seith that al that writen is,
For Saint Paul says that all that is written,
To oure doctrine it is ywrite, ywis;
Is written for our instruction, indeed;
Taketh the fruyt, and lat the chaf be stille.
Take the fruit, and let the chaff be still.
Now, goode God, if that it be thy wille,
Now, good God, if it be thy will,
As seith my lord, so make us alle goode men,
As says my lord, make us all good men,
And brynge us to his heighe blisse! Amen.
And bring us to his high bliss! Amen.
"Sire Nonnes Preest," oure Hooste seide anoon,
"Sir Nun's Priest," our Host said straightway,
"I-blessed be thy breche, and every stoon!
"Blessed be thy buttocks, and every testicle!
This was a murie tale of Chauntecleer.
This was a merry tale of Chanticleer.
But by my trouthe, if thou were seculer,
But by my troth, if thou were a layman,
Thou woldest ben a trede-foul aright.
Thou would be an excellent copulator of fouls (rooster).
For if thou have corage as thou hast myght,
For if thou have as much desire as thou hast might,
Thee were nede of hennes, as I wene,
Thou would have need of hens, as I think,
Ya, moo than seven tymes seventene.
Yea, more than seven times seventeen.
See, whiche braunes hath this gentil preest,
See, what muscles has this gentle priest,
So gret a nekke, and swich a large breest!
So big a neck, and such a large chest!
He loketh as a sperhauk with his yen;
He looks like a sparrow-hauk with his eyes;
Him nedeth nat his colour for to dyen
He needs not paint his complexion
With brasile ne with greyn of Portyngale.
With red dye nor with grain of Portugal.
Now, sire, faire falle yow for youre tale!"
Now, sir, may good fortune come to you for your tale!"
And after that he, with ful merie chere,
And after that he, with a very merry manner,
Seide unto another, as ye shuln heere.
Said unto another, as you shall hear.
