The Prologe of the Reves Tale.
The Prologue of Reeve's Tale.
Whan folk hadde laughen at this nyce cas
When folk had laughed at this foolish business
Of Absolon and hende Nicholas,
Of Absolon and clever Nicholas,
Diverse folk diversely they seyde,
Different folk said different opinions,
But for the moore part they loughe and pleyde.
But for the most part they laughed and enjoyed themselves.
Ne at this tale I saugh no man hym greve,
And at this tale I saw no man aggrieved,
But it were oonly Osewold the Reve.
Except for only Osewold the Reeve.
By cause he was of carpenteris craft,
Because he was of the carpenter's craft,
A litel ire is in his herte ylaft;
A little anger is left in his heart;
He gan to grucche, and blamed it a lite.
He began to grouch, and criticized it a little.
"So theek," quod he, "ful wel koude I thee quite
"As I may prosper," said he, "very well could I repay thee
With bleryng of a proud milleres ye,
With (a tale of the) blearing of a proud miller's eye (tricking him),
If that me liste speke of ribaudye.
If I wanted to speak of ribaldry.
But ik am oold; me list not pley for age;
But I am old; because of age I do not want to play;
Gras tyme is doon; my fodder is now forage;
Grass time is done; my fodder is now dry straw;
This white top writeth myne olde yeris;
This white head reveals my old years;
Myn herte is also mowled as myne heris,
My heart is as moldy as my hairs,
But if I fare as dooth an open-ers --
Unless I fare as does the fruit of the medlar --
That ilke fruyt is ever lenger the wers,
That same fruit continually grows worse,
Til it be roten in mullok or in stree.
Until it is rotten in rubbish or in straw.
We olde men, I drede, so fare we:
We old men, I fear, fare like that:
Til we be roten, kan we nat be rype;
Until we are rotten, we can not be ripe;
We hoppen alwey whil that the world wol pype.
We dance always while the world will pipe.
For in oure wyl ther stiketh evere a nayl,
For in our will there sticks ever a nail,
To have an hoor heed and a grene tayl,
To have a white head and a green tail,
As hath a leek; for thogh oure myght be goon,
As a leek has; for though our power is gone,
Oure wyl desireth folie evere in oon.
Our will desires folly continually.
For whan we may nat doon, than wol we speke;
For when we can not do anything, then will we talk about it;
Yet in oure asshen olde is fyr yreke.
Yet in our old ashes fire is raked over (covered).
"Foure gleedes han we, which I shal devyse --
"Four live coals have we, which I shall describe --
Avauntyng, liyng, anger, coveitise;
Boasting, lying, anger, greed;
Thise foure sparkles longen unto eelde.
These four little sparks belong to old age.
Oure olde lemes mowe wel been unweelde,
Our old limbs may well be feeble,
But wyl ne shal nat faillen, that is sooth.
But desire shall not be lacking, that is truth.
And yet ik have alwey a coltes tooth,
And yet I have always a young man's desires,
As many a yeer as it is passed henne
As many years as have passed hence
Syn that my tappe of lif bigan to renne.
Since my tap of life began to run.
For sikerly, whan I was bore, anon
For surely, when I was born, immediately
Deeth drough the tappe of lyf and leet it gon,
Death turned on the spigot of life and let it flow,
And ever sithe hath so the tappe yronne
And ever since the tap has so run
Til that almoost al empty is the tonne.
Until the barrel is almost all empty.
The streem of lyf now droppeth on the chymbe.
The stream of life now drops on the rim.
The sely tonge may wel rynge and chymbe
The foolish tongue may well ring and chime
Of wrecchednesse that passed is ful yoore;
About wretchedness that passed long ago;
With olde folk, save dotage, is namoore!"
With old folk, save dotage, there is no more!"
Whan that oure Hoost hadde herd this sermonyng,
When our Host had heard this sermon making,
He gan to speke as lordly as a kyng.
He began to speak as lordly as a king.
He seide, "What amounteth al this wit?
He said, "What amounts all this wit?
What shul we speke alday of hooly writ?
What! shall we speak all day of holy writ?
The devel made a reve for to preche,
The devil made a reeve to preach,
Or of a soutere a shipman or a leche.
Or of a cobbler made a shipman or a physician.
Sey forth thy tale, and tarie nat the tyme.
Say forth thy tale, and do not waste the time.
Lo Depeford, and it is half-wey pryme!
Lo Deptford, and it is almost seven thirty!
Lo Grenewych, ther many a shrewe is inne!
Lo Greenwich, in which is many a rascal!
It were al tyme thy tale to bigynne."
It is well time to begin thy tale."
"Now, sires," quod this Osewold the Reve,
"Now, sires," said this Osewold the Reeve,
"I pray yow alle that ye nat yow greve,
"I pray yow all that you not be displeased,
Thogh I answere, and somdeel sette his howve;
Though I answer (him), and somewhat make a fool of him;
For leveful is with force force of-showve.
For it is permissable to repel force with force.
"This dronke Millere hath ytoold us heer
"This drunk Miller has told us here
How that bigyled was a carpenteer,
How a carpenter was tricked,
Peraventure in scorn, for I am oon.
Perhaps in scorn, for I am one.
And, by youre leve, I shal hym quite anoon;
And, by your leave, I shall repay him right now;
Right in his cherles termes wol I speke.
Right in his churl's terms will I speak.
I pray to God his nekke mote to-breke;
I pray to God his neck may break into pieces;
He kan wel in myn eye seen a stalke,
He can well in my eye see a piece of straw,
But in his owene he kan nat seen a balke."
But in his own he can not see a large piece of timber."
Heere bigynneth the Reves Tale.
Here begins the Reeves Tale.
At Trumpyngtoun, nat fer fro Cantebrigge,
At Trumpington, not far from Cambridge,
Ther gooth a brook, and over that a brigge,
There goes a brook, and over that a bridge,
Upon the whiche brook ther stant a melle;
Upon the which brook there stands a mill;
And this is verray sooth that I yow telle:
And this is absolute truth that I tell you:
A millere was ther dwellynge many a day.
A miller was there dwelling many a day.
As any pecok he was proud and gay.
As any peacock he was proud and gay.
Pipen he koude and fisshe, and nettes beete,
He could play the bagpipe and fish, and mend nets,
And turne coppes, and wel wrastle and sheete;
And play a drinking game, and well wrestle and shoot;
Ay by his belt he baar a long panade,
Always by his belt he carried a long cutlass,
And of a swerd ful trenchant was the blade.
And very sharp was the blade of the sword.
A joly poppere baar he in his pouche;
An elegant dagger he carried in his pouch;
Ther was no man, for peril, dorste hym touche.
There was no man, for peril, dared touch him.
A Sheffeld thwitel baar he in his hose.
A Sheffield knife he carried in his hose.
Round was his face, and camus was his nose;
Round was his face, and he had a pug nose;
As piled as an ape was his skulle.
As bald as an ape was his skull.
He was a market-betere atte fulle.
He was a quarrelsome bully in every way.
Ther dorste no wight hand upon hym legge,
There dared no person lay hand upon him,
That he ne swoor he sholde anon abegge.
That he did not swear he should pay for it right away.
A theef he was for sothe of corn and mele,
A thief he was, in truth, of grain and meal,
And that a sly, and usaunt for to stele.
And that a sly one, and accustomed to steal.
His name was hoote deynous Symkyn.
His name was called haughty Symkyn.
A wyf he hadde, ycomen of noble kyn;
A wife he had, come of noble kin;
The person of the toun hir fader was.
The parson of the town was her father.
With hire he yaf ful many a panne of bras,
With her he gave very many a pan of brass,
For that Symkyn sholde in his blood allye.
So that Symkyn should be allied with his family.
She was yfostred in a nonnerye;
She was fostered in a nunnery;
For Symkyn wolde no wyf, as he sayde,
For Symkyn would have no wife, as he said,
But she were wel ynorissed and a mayde,
Unless she were well educated and a virgin,
To saven his estaat of yomanrye.
To preserve his state of yeomanry.
And she was proud, and peert as is a pye.
And she was proud, and brazen as is a magpie.
A ful fair sighte was it upon hem two;
A very fair sight was it to look upon those two;
On halydayes biforn hire wolde he go
On holidays before her would he go
With his typet wounde aboute his heed,
With the tip of his hood wound about his head,
And she cam after in a gyte of reed;
And she came after in a gown of red;
And Symkyn hadde hosen of the same.
And Symkyn had hose of the same color.
Ther dorste no wight clepen hire but "dame";
There dared no one call her anything but "lady";
Was noon so hardy that wente by the weye
There was no one so brave that went by the way
That with hire dorste rage or ones pleye,
That dared flirt with her or once play,
But if he wolde be slayn of Symkyn
Unless he wished to be slain by Symkyn
With panade, or with knyf, or boidekyn.
With cutlass, or with knife, or dagger.
For jalous folk ben perilous everemo --
For jealous folk are dangerous always --
Algate they wolde hire wyves wenden so.
At least they would like their wives to think so.
And eek, for she was somdel smoterlich,
And also, because she was a bit besmirched (by her illegitimacy),
She was as digne as water in a dich,
She was as haughty as water in a ditch,
And ful of hoker and of bisemare.
And full of disdain and of scorn.
Hir thoughte that a lady sholde hire spare,
She thought that a lady should be aloof,
What for hire kynrede and hir nortelrie
Considering her family and her education
That she hadde lerned in the nonnerie.
Which she had learned in the nunnery.
A doghter hadde they bitwixe hem two
A daughter had they between them two
Of twenty yeer, withouten any mo,
Of twenty years of age, without any more,
Savynge a child that was of half yeer age;
Except for a child that was a half year of age;
In cradel it lay and was a propre page.
In cradle it lay and was a good looking little boy.
This wenche thikke and wel ygrowen was,
This wench was thick and well grown,
With kamus nose and eyen greye as glas,
With pug nose and eyes gray as glass,
With buttokes brode and brestes rounde and hye.
With buttocks broad and breasts round and high.
But right fair was hire heer; I wol nat lye.
But right fair was her hair; I will not lie.
This person of the toun, for she was feir,
This parson of the town, because she was fair,
In purpos was to maken hire his heir,
Was determined to make her his heir,
Bothe of his catel and his mesuage,
Both of his property and his household,
And straunge he made it of hir mariage.
And he raised difficulties about her marriage.
His purpos was for to bistowe hire hye
His purpose was to bestow her high
Into som worthy blood of auncetrye;
Into some worthy family of noble ancestry;
For hooly chirches good moot been despended
For holy church's goods must be dispensed
On hooly chirches blood, that is descended.
To holy church's blood, which is descended from the church.
Therfore he wolde his hooly blood honoure,
Therefore he would his holy blood honor,
Though that he hooly chirche sholde devoure.
Though he holy church should devour.
Greet sokene hath this millere, out of doute,
A profitable monopoly on milling has this miller, out of doubt,
With whete and malt of al the land aboute;
With wheat and malt of all the land about;
And nameliche ther was a greet collegge
And namely there was an important college
Men clepen the Soler Halle at Cantebregge;
People call the Soler Hall at Cambridge;
Ther was hir whete and eek hir malt ygrounde.
There their wheat and also their malt was ground.
And on a day it happed, in a stounde,
And on one day it happened, at a time,
Sik lay the maunciple on a maladye;
The manciple lay sick with a malady;
Men wenden wisly that he sholde dye.
People thought indeed that he should die.
For which this millere stal bothe mele and corn
For which this miller stole both meal and grain
An hundred tyme moore than biforn;
A hundred times more than before;
For therbiforn he stal but curteisly,
For before this he stole but courteously,
But now he was a theef outrageously,
But now he was a thief excessively,
For which the wardeyn chidde and made fare.
For which the warden (of the college) complained and made a fuss.
But therof sette the millere nat a tare;
But the miller thought that not worth a weed;
He craketh boost, and swoor it was nat so.
He blustered fiercely, and swore it was not so.
Thanne were ther yonge povre scolers two,
Then were there two young poor scholars,
That dwelten in this halle, of which I seye.
Who dwelt in this hall, of which I tell.
Testif they were, and lusty for to pleye,
Headstrong they were, and eager for sport,
And, oonly for hire myrthe and revelrye,
And, only for their mirth and amusement,
Upon the wardeyn bisily they crye
Upon the warden busily they implore
To yeve hem leve, but a litel stounde,
To give them leave, for but a little while,
To goon to mille and seen hir corn ygrounde;
To go to the mill and see their grain ground;
And hardily they dorste leye hir nekke
And boldly they dared pledge their necks
The millere sholde not stele hem half a pekke
The miller should not steal from them half a peck
Of corn by sleighte, ne by force hem reve;
Of grain by trickery, nor rob them by force;
And at the laste the wardeyn yaf hem leve.
And at the last the warden gave hem leave.
John highte that oon, and Aleyn highte that oother;
John was called that one, and Aleyn was called that other;
Of o toun were they born, that highte Strother,
Of one town were they born, that was called Strother,
Fer in the north; I kan nat telle where.
Far in the north; I can not tell where.
This Aleyn maketh redy al his gere,
This Aleyn makes ready all his gear,
And on an hors the sak he caste anon.
And on a horse the sack he cast immediately.
Forth goth Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
Forth goes Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
With good swerd and with bokeler by hir syde.
With good sword and with buckler by their sides.
John knew the wey -- hem nedede no gyde --
John knew the way -- they needed no guide --
And at the mille the sak adoun he layth.
And at the mill he lays the sack down.
Aleyn spak first: "Al hayl, Symond, y-fayth!
Aleyn spoke first: "All hail, Symond, in faith!
Hou fares thy faire doghter and thy wyf?"
How fares thy faire daughter and thy wife?"
"Aleyn, welcome," quod Symkyn, "by my lyf!
"Aleyn, welcome," said Symkyn, "by my life!
And John also, how now, what do ye heer?"
And John also, how now, what do you here?"
"Symond," quod John, "by God, nede has na peer.
"Symond," said John, "by God, need knows no law.
Hym boes serve hymself that has na swayn,
He who has no servant must serve himself,
Or elles he is a fool, as clerkes sayn.
Or else he is a fool, as clerks say.
Oure manciple, I hope he wil be deed,
Our manciple, I expect he will be dead,
Swa werkes ay the wanges in his heed;
So continually ache the teeth in his head;
And forthy is I come, and eek Alayn,
And therefore I am come, and also Alayn,
To grynde oure corn and carie it ham agayn;
To grind our grain and carry it home again;
I pray yow spede us heythen that ye may."
I pray you speed us hence as fast as you can."
"It shal be doon," quod Symkyn, "by my fay!
"It shall be done," said Symkyn, "by my faith!
What wol ye doon whil that it is in hande?"
What will you do while it is being done?"
"By God, right by the hopur wil I stande,"
"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"
Quod John, "and se howgates the corn gas in.
Said John, "and see how the grain goes in.
Yet saugh I nevere, by my fader kyn,
Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,
How that the hopur wagges til and fra."
How the hopper wags to and fro."
Aleyn answerde, "John, and wiltow swa?
Aleyn answered, "John, and wilt thou do so?
Thanne wil I be bynethe, by my croun,
Then will I be beneath, by my head,
And se how that the mele falles doun
And see how the meal falls down
Into the trough; that sal be my disport.
Into the trough; that shall be my sport.
For John, y-faith, I may been of youre sort;
For John, in faith, I may be like you;
I is as ille a millere as ar ye."
I am as poor a miller as you are."
This millere smyled of hir nycetee,
This miller smiled at their foolishness,
And thoghte, "Al this nys doon but for a wyle.
And thought, "All this is done only for a trick.
They wene that no man may hem bigyle,
They think that no man can trick them,
But by my thrift, yet shal I blere hir ye,
But by my welfare, yet shall I blear their eyes (fool them),
For al the sleighte in hir philosophye.
Despite all the trickery in their philosophy.
The moore queynte crekes that they make,
The more ingenious tricks that they make,
The moore wol I stele whan I take.
The more will I steal when I take.
In stide of flour yet wol I yeve hem bren.
Instead of flour yet will I give them bran.
`The gretteste clerkes been noght wisest men,'
`The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,'
As whilom to the wolf thus spak the mare.
As once to the wolf thus spoke the mare.
Of al hir art counte I noght a tare."
All their learning I reckon not worth a weed."
Out at the dore he gooth ful pryvely,
Out at the door he goes full stealthily,
Whan that he saugh his tyme, softely.
When he saw his time, quietly.
He looketh up and doun til he hath founde
He looks up and down until he has found
The clerkes hors, ther as it stood ybounde
The clerks' horse, where it stood tied
Bihynde the mille, under a levesel;
Behind the mill, under an arbor;
And to the hors he goth hym faire and wel;
And to the horse he goes gently;
He strepeth of the brydel right anon.
He strips off the bridle right away.
And whan the hors was laus, he gynneth gon
And when the horse was loose, he begins to go
Toward the fen, ther wilde mares renne,
Toward the fen, where wild mares run,
And forth with "wehee," thurgh thikke and thurgh thenne.
And forth with "wehee," through thick and through thin.
This millere gooth agayn, no word he seyde,
This miller goes back to the mill, no word he said,
But dooth his note, and with the clerkes pleyde
But does his work, and with the clerks amused himself
Til that hir corn was faire and weel ygrounde.
Until their grain was completely ground.
And whan the mele is sakked and ybounde,
And when the meal is sacked and tied,
This John goth out and fynt his hors away,
This John goes out and finds his horse gone away,
And gan to crie "Harrow!" and "Weylaway!
And began to cry "Help!" and "Wellaway!
Oure hors is lorn, Alayn, for Goddes banes,
Our horse is lost, Alayn, for God's bones,
Step on thy feet! Com of, man, al atanes!
Step on thy feet! Come on, man, quickly!
Allas, our wardeyn has his palfrey lorn."
Alas, our warden has lost his saddle horse."
This Aleyn al forgat, bothe mele and corn;
This Aleyn forgot everything, both meal and grain;
Al was out of his mynde his housbondrie.
All his skillful management was out of his mind.
"What, whilk way is he geen?" he gan to crie.
"What, which way is he gone?" he began to cry.
The wyf cam lepynge inward with a ren.
The wife cam leaping inward at a run.
She seyde, "Allas! youre hors goth to the fen
She said, "Alas! your horse goes to the fen
With wilde mares, as faste as he may go.
With wild mares, as fast as he can go.
Unthank come on his hand that boond hym so,
Curses come on his hand that tied him so carelessly,
And he that bettre sholde han knyt the reyne!"
And he that should have tied the rein better!"
"Allas," quod John, "Aleyn, for Cristes peyne
"Alas," said John, "Aleyn, for Christ's pain
Lay doun thy swerd, and I wil myn alswa.
Lay down thy sword, and I will mine also.
I is ful wight, God waat, as is a raa;
I am full strong (swift), God knows, as is a roe deer;
By Goddes herte, he sal nat scape us bathe!
By God's heart, he shall not escape us both!
Why ne had thow pit the capul in the lathe?
Why did thou not put the horse in the barn?
Ilhayl! By God, Alayn, thou is a fonne!"
Bad luck! By God, Alayn, thou art a fool!"
Thise sely clerkes han ful faste yronne
These hapless clerks have run very fast
Toward the fen, bothe Aleyn and eek John.
Toward the fen, both Aleyn and also John.
And whan the millere saugh that they were gon,
And when the miller saw that they were gone,
He half a busshel of hir flour hath take,
He half a bushel of their flour has taken,
And bad his wyf go knede it in a cake.
And ordered his wife to go knead it in a cake.
He seyde, "I trowe the clerkes were aferd.
He said, "I suppose the clerks were leery (of what I might do).
Yet kan a millere make a clerkes berd,
Yet can a miller make a clerk's beard (trick a clerk),
For al his art; now lat hem goon hir weye!
Despite all his learning; now let them go their way!
Lo, wher he gooth! Ye, lat the children pleye.
Lo, there he goes! Yes, let the children play.
They gete hym nat so lightly, by my croun."
They will not catch him easily, by my crown."
Thise sely clerkes rennen up and doun
These hapless clerks run up and down
With "Keep! Keep! Stand! Stand! Jossa, warderere,
With "Stop! Stop! Stand! Stand! Down there, watch out behind,
Ga whistle thou, and I shal kepe hym heere!"
Go whistle thou, and I shall catch him here!"
But shortly, til that it was verray nyght,
But shortly, until that it was truly night,
They koude nat, though they dide al hir myght,
They could not, though they did al their might,
Hir capul cacche, he ran alwey so faste,
Catch their horse, he ran always so fast,
Til in a dych they caughte hym atte laste.
Until in a ditch they caught him at the last.
Wery and weet, as beest is in the reyn,
Weary and wet, as a beast is in the rain,
Comth sely John, and with him comth Aleyn.
Comes hapless John, and with him comes Aleyn.
"Allas," quod John, "the day that I was born!
"Alas," said John, "the day that I was born!
Now are we dryve til hethyng and til scorn.
Now are we driven to contempt and to scorn.
Oure corn is stoln; men wil us fooles calle,
Our grain is stolen; men will call us fools,
Bathe the wardeyn and oure felawes alle,
Both the warden and all our fellows,
And namely the millere, weylaway!"
And namely the miller, wellaway!"
Thus pleyneth John as he gooth by the way
Thus laments John as he goes by the way
Toward the mille, and Bayard in his hond.
Toward the mill, and the horse Bayard in his hand.
The millere sittynge by the fyr he fond,
The miller sitting by the fire he found,
For it was nyght, and forther myghte they noght;
For it was night, and further they could not go;
But for the love of God they hym bisoght
But for the love of God they ask him
Of herberwe and of ese, as for hir peny.
For lodging and for refreshment, for their cash.
The millere seyde agayn, "If ther be eny,
The miller said in reply, "If there be any,
Swich as it is, yet shal ye have youre part.
Such as it is, yet shall you have your share.
Myn hous is streit, but ye han lerned art;
My house is small, but you have learned the art of logic;
Ye konne by argumentes make a place
You know how by logical arguments to make a place
A myle brood of twenty foot of space.
A mile broad out of twenty feet of space.
Lat se now if this place may suffise,
Let's see now if this place may suffice,
Or make it rowm with speche, as is youre gise."
Or make it large by speech, as is your custom."
"Now, Symond," seyde John, "by Seint Cutberd,
"Now, Symond," said John, "by Saint Cuthbert,
Ay is thou myrie, and this is faire answerd.
Thou art always joking, and this is nicely answered.
I have herd seyd, `Man sal taa of twa thynges:
I have heard said, `Man shall take one of two things:
Slyk as he fyndes, or taa slyk as he brynges.'
Such as he finds, or take such as he brings.'
But specially I pray thee, hooste deere,
But specially I pray thee, host dear,
Get us som mete and drynke, and make us cheere,
Get us some food and drink, and make us good cheer,
And we wil payen trewely atte fulle.
And we will pay truly at the full.
With empty hand men may na haukes tulle;
With empty hand men may lure no hawks;
Loo, heere oure silver, redy for to spende."
Lo, here is our silver, ready to spend."
This millere into toun his doghter sende
This miller into town his daughter sent
For ale and breed, and rosted hem a goos,
For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,
And boond hire hors, it sholde namoore go loos,
And tied up their horse, it should no more go loose,
And in his owene chambre hem made a bed,
And in his own bedroom made them a bed,
With sheetes and with chalons faire yspred
With sheets and with blankets nicely spread
Noght from his owene bed ten foot or twelve.
Not ten feet or twelve from his own bed.
His doghter hadde a bed, al by hirselve,
His daughter had a bed, all by herself,
Right in the same chambre by and by.
Right in the same chamber side by side.
It myghte be no bet, and cause why?
It could be no better, and (do you know) the cause why?
Ther was no roumer herberwe in the place.
There was no larger lodging in the place.
They soupen and they speke, hem to solace,
They sup and they converse, to entertain themselves,
And drynken evere strong ale atte beste.
And drink ever strong ale of the best quality.
Aboute mydnyght wente they to reste.
About midnight they went to bed.
Wel hath this millere vernysshed his heed;
Well has this miller varnished his head (drank heavily);
Ful pale he was for dronken, and nat reed.
Full pale he was for drunkenness, and not red.
He yexeth, and he speketh thurgh the nose
He belches, and he speaks through the nose
As he were on the quakke, or on the pose.
As if he had hoarseness, or had a cold.
To bedde he goth, and with hym goth his wyf.
To bed he goes, and with him goes his wife.
As any jay she light was and jolyf,
She was as cheerful and jolly as any jay,
So was hir joly whistle wel ywet.
So was her jolly whistle well wetted.
The cradel at hir beddes feet is set,
The cradle at her bed's feet is set,
To rokken, and to yeve the child to sowke.
To rock, and to give the child to suck.
And whan that dronken al was in the crowke,
And when all that was in the crock was drunk,
To bedde wente the doghter right anon;
To bed went the daughter right away;
To bedde goth Aleyn and also John;
To bed goes Aleyn and also John;
Ther nas na moore -- hem nedede no dwale.
There was no more -- they needed no sleeping potion.
This millere hath so wisely bibbed ale
This miller has imbibed so much ale
That as an hors he fnorteth in his sleep,
That he snorts like a horse in his sleep,
Ne of his tayl bihynde he took no keep.
And of his tail behind he took no heed.
His wyf bar hym a burdon, a ful strong;
His wife bore him a bass accompaniment, very loud;
Men myghte hir rowtyng heere two furlong;
One could hear their snoring two furlongs away;
The wenche rowteth eek, par compaignye.
The wench snores also, to keep them company.
Aleyn the clerk, that herde this melodye,
Aleyn the clerk, who heard this melody,
He poked John, and seyde, "Slepestow?
He poked John, and said, "Sleepest thou?
Herdestow evere slyk a sang er now?
Heardest thou ever such a song before now?
Lo, swilk a complyn is ymel hem alle;
Lo, such a compline (evening service) is made by them all;
A wilde fyr upon thair bodyes falle!
May a wild fire upon their bodies fall!
Wha herkned evere slyk a ferly thyng?
Who heard ever such an amazing thing?
Ye, they sal have the flour of il endyng.
Yes, they shall have the best (i.e., the worst) of a bad ending.
This lange nyght ther tydes me na reste;
This long night there comes to me no sleep;
But yet, na fors, al sal be for the beste.
But yet, no matter, all shall be for the best.
For, John," seyde he, "als evere moot I thryve,
For, John," said he, "as ever I may thrive,
If that I may, yon wenche wil I swyve.
If I can, yon wench will I screw.
Som esement has lawe yshapen us,
Some redress the law has shaped for us,
For, John, ther is a lawe that says thus:
For, John, there is a law that says thus:
That gif a man in a point be agreved,
That if a man in one point is injured,
That in another he sal be releved.
That in another he shall be relieved.
Oure corn is stoln, sothly, it is na nay,
Our grain is stolen, truly, it can not be denied,
And we han had an il fit al this day;
And we have had a hard time all this day;
And syn I sal have neen amendement
And since I shall have no recompense
Agayn my los, I will have esement.
For my loss, I will have satisfaction.
By Goddes sale, it sal neen other bee!"
By God's soul, it shall be no other way!"
This John answerde, "Alayn, avyse thee!
This John answered, "Alayn, be careful!
The millere is a perilous man," he seyde,
The miller is a perilous man," he said,
"And gif that he out of his sleep abreyde,
"And if he out of his sleep suddenly awoke,
He myghte doon us bathe a vileynye."
He might do injury to us both."
Aleyn answerde, "I counte hym nat a flye."
Aleyn answered, "I reckon him not worth a fly."
And up he rist, and by the wenche he crepte.
And up he rises, and by the wench he crept.
This wenche lay uprighte and faste slepte,
This wench lay on her back and fast slept,
Til he so ny was, er she myghte espie,
Until he was so near, before she could see him,
That it had been to late for to crie,
It was too late to cry out,
And shortly for to seyn, they were aton.
And shortly to speak, they were together.
Now pley, Aleyn, for I wol speke of John.
Now play, Aleyn, for I will speak of John.
This John lith stille a furlong wey or two,
This John lies still five minutes or so,
And to hymself he maketh routhe and wo.
And to himself he laments and feels sorry.
"Allas!" quod he, "this is a wikked jape;
"Alas!" said he, "this is a wicked trick;
Now may I seyn that I is but an ape.
Now may I say that I am nothing but a fool.
Yet has my felawe somwhat for his harm;
Yet has my fellow something for his harm;
He has the milleris doghter in his arm.
He has the miller's daughter in his arm.
He auntred hym, and has his nedes sped,
He took a risk, and has accomplished his purpose,
And I lye as a draf-sak in my bed;
And I lie like a sack of rubbish in my bed;
And when this jape is tald another day,
And when this trick is told another day,
I sal been halde a daf, a cokenay!
I shall be considered a fool, a weakling!
I wil arise and auntre it, by my fayth!
I will arise and chance it, by my faith!
`Unhardy is unseely,' thus men sayth."
`The timid one is unlucky,' thus people say."
And up he roos, and softely he wente
And up he rose, and quietly he went
Unto the cradel, and in his hand it hente,
To the cradle, and in his hand seized it,
And baar it softe unto his beddes feet.
And carried it quietly to the foot of his bed.
Soone after this the wyf hir rowtyng leet,
Soon after this the wife stopped her snoring,
And gan awake, and wente hire out to pisse,
And awoke, and went out to piss,
And cam agayn, and gan hir cradel mysse,
And came back, and began to miss her cradle,
And groped heer and ther, but she foond noon.
And groped here and there, but she found none.
"Allas!" quod she, "I hadde almoost mysgoon;
"Alas!" said she, "I had almost gone wrong;
I hadde almoost goon to the clerkes bed.
I had almost gone to the clerks' bed.
Ey, benedicite! Thanne hadde I foule ysped!"
Ay, bless me! Then I would have made a mess of it!"
And forth she gooth til she the cradel fond.
And forth she goes until she found the cradle.
She gropeth alwey forther with hir hond,
She gropes always further with her hand,
And foond the bed, and thoghte noght but good,
And found the bed, and thought all was well,
By cause that the cradel by it stood,
Because the cradle by it stood,
And nyste wher she was, for it was derk;
And did not know where she was, for it was dark;
But faire and wel she creep in to the clerk,
But gently she crept in to the clerk,
And lith ful stille, and wolde han caught a sleep.
And lies full still, and would have gone to sleep.
Withinne a while this John the clerk up leep,
Within a moment this John the clerk leaped up,
And on this goode wyf he leith on soore.
And on this good wife he lays on vigorously.
So myrie a fit ne hadde she nat ful yoore;
She had not had so merry an experience for a long time;
He priketh harde and depe as he were mad.
He stabs hard and deep as if he were mad.
This joly lyf han thise two clerkes lad
This jolly life have these two clerks led
Til that the thridde cok bigan to synge.
Until the third cock began to sing (an hour before dawn).
Aleyn wax wery in the dawenynge,
Aleyn grew weary at the time of dawn,
For he had swonken al the longe nyght,
For he had labored all the long night,
And seyde, "Fare weel, Malyne, sweete wight!
And said, "Farewell, Malyne, sweet creature!
The day is come; I may no lenger byde;
The day is come; I may no longer remain here;
But everemo, wher so I go or ryde,
But evermore, wherever I walk or ride,
I is thyn awen clerk, swa have I seel!"
I am thine own clerk, as I may prosper!"
"Now, deere lemman," quod she, "go, far weel!
"Now, dear sweetheart," said she, "go, farewell!
But er thow go, o thyng I wol thee telle:
But before thou go, one thing I will tell thee:
Whan that thou wendest homward by the melle,
When thou go homeward by the mill,
Right at the entree of the dore bihynde
Right at the entry behind the door
Thou shalt a cake of half a busshel fynde
Thou shalt find a cake of half a bushel
That was ymaked of thyn owene mele,
That was made of thine own meal,
Which that I heelp my sire for to stele.
Which I helped my father to steal.
And, goode lemman, God thee save and kepe!"
And, good sweetheart, God save and keep thee!"
And with that word almoost she gan to wepe.
And with that word she almost began to weep.
Aleyn up rist, and thoughte, "Er that it dawe,
Aleyn up rises, and thought, "Before it dawns,
I wol go crepen in by my felawe,"
I will go creep in by my fellow,"
And fond the cradel with his hand anon.
And found the cradle with his hand right away.
"By God," thoughte he, "al wrang I have mysgon.
"By God," thought he, "I have gone all wrong.
Myn heed is toty of my swynk to-nyght,
My head is dizzy from my work to-night,
That makes me that I ga nat aright.
That makes me go not right.
I woot wel by the cradel I have mysgo;
I know well by the cradle I have gone wrong;
Heere lith the millere and his wyf also."
Here lies the miller and his wife also."
And forth he goth, a twenty devel way,
And forth he goes, in the name of twenty devils,
Unto the bed ther as the millere lay.
Unto the bed where the miller lay.
He wende have cropen by his felawe John,
He expected to have crept in by his fellow John,
And by the millere in he creep anon,
And in by the miller he crept right then,
And caughte hym by the nekke, and softe he spak.
And caught him by the neck, and quietly he spoke.
He seyde, "Thou John, thou swynes-heed, awak,
He said, "Thou John, thou pig's-head, awake,
For Cristes saule, and heer a noble game.
For Christ's soul, and hear a real joke.
For by that lord that called is Seint Jame,
For by that lord that is called Saint James,
As I have thries in this shorte nyght
I have three times in this short night
Swyved the milleres doghter bolt upright,
Screwed the miller's daughter flat on her back,
Whil thow hast, as a coward, been agast."
While thou hast, like a coward, been terrified."
"Ye, false harlot," quod the millere, "hast?
"Yes, false scoundrel," said the miller, "hast (thou done so)?
A, false traitour! False clerk!" quod he,
Ah, false traitor! False clerk!" said he,
"Thow shalt be deed, by Goddes dignitee!
"Thou shalt be dead, by God's worthiness!
Who dorste be so boold to disparage
Who dared be so bold to degrade
My doghter, that is come of swich lynage?"
My daughter, who is come from such noble lineage?"
And by the throte-bolle he caughte Alayn,
And by the Adam's apple he caught Alayn,
And he hente hym despitously agayn,
And he seized him angrily in turn,
And on the nose he smoot hym with his fest.
And on the nose he smote him with his fist.
Doun ran the blody streem upon his brest;
Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast;
And in the floor, with nose and mouth tobroke,
And on the floor, with nose and mouth badly broken,
They walwe as doon two pigges in a poke;
They wallow as do two pigs in a bag;
And up they goon, and doun agayn anon,
And up they go, and down again straightway,
Til that the millere sporned at a stoon,
Until the miller stumbled on a stone,
And doun he fil bakward upon his wyf,
And down he fell backward upon his wife,
That wiste no thyng of this nyce stryf;
Who knew nothing of this foolish strife;
For she was falle aslepe a lite wight
For she was fallen asleep a little bit
With John the clerk, that waked hadde al nyght,
With John the clerk, who had been awake all night,
And with the fal out of hir sleep she breyde.
And with the fall out of her sleep she started up.
"Help! hooly croys of Bromeholm," she seyde,
"Help! holy cross of Bromeholm," she said,
"In manus tuas! Lord, to thee I calle!
"In your hands! Lord, to Thee I call!
Awak, Symond! The feend is on me falle.
Awake, Symond! The fiend has fallen on me.
Myn herte is broken; help! I nam but deed!
My heart is broken; help! I am as good as dead!
Ther lyth oon upon my wombe and on myn heed.
There lies one upon my belly and one on my head.
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerkes fighte!"
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerks fight!"
This John stirte up as faste as ever he myghte,
This John started up as fast as ever he could,
And graspeth by the walles to and fro,
And grasps by the walls to and fro,
To fynde a staf; and she stirte up also,
To find a staff; and she leaped up also,
And knew the estres bet than dide this John,
And knew the interior of the house better than did this John,
And by the wal a staf she foond anon,
And by the wall a staff she found right away,
And saugh a litel shymeryng of a light,
And saw a little glimmering of a light,
For at an hole in shoon the moone bright,
For at a hole in shone the moon bright,
And by that light she saugh hem bothe two,
And by that light she saw both the two of them,
But sikerly she nyste who was who,
But surely she did not know who was who,
But as she saugh a whit thyng in hir ye.
But she saw a white thing in her eye.
And whan she gan this white thyng espye,
And when she did espy this white thing,
She wende the clerk hadde wered a volupeer,
She thought the clerk had worn a night cap,
And with the staf she drow ay neer and neer,
And with the staff she drew ever nearer and nearer,
And wende han hit this Aleyn at the fulle,
And intended to have hit this Aleyn squarely,
And smoot the millere on the pyled skulle,
And smote the miller on the bald skull,
That doun he gooth, and cride, "Harrow! I dye!"
So that down he goes, and cried, "Help! I die!"
Thise clerkes beete hym weel and lete hym lye,
These clerks beat him well and let him lie,
And greythen hem, and tooke hir hors anon,
And dress themselves, and took their horse straightway,
And eek hire mele, and on hir wey they gon.
And also their meal, and on their way they go.
And at the mille yet they tooke hir cake
And at the mill yet they took their cake
Of half a busshel flour, ful wel ybake.
Of half a bushel flour, very well baked.
Thus is the proude millere wel ybete,
Thus is the proud miller well beaten,
And hath ylost the gryndynge of the whete,
And has lost the charge for grinding of the wheat,
And payed for the soper everideel
And paid for the supper every bit
Of Aleyn and of John, that bette hym weel.
Of Aleyn and of John, who beat him well.
His wyf is swyved, and his doghter als.
His wife is screwed, and his daughter also.
Lo, swich it is a millere to be fals!
Lo, this is how it is when a miller is false!
And therfore this proverbe is seyd ful sooth,
And therefore this proverb is said very truly,
"Hym thar nat wene wel that yvele dooth."
"One who does evil should not expect good."
A gylour shal hymself bigyled be.
A trickster shall himself be tricked.
And God, that sitteth heighe in magestee,
And God, that sits high in majesty,
Save al this compaignye, grete and smale!
Save al this company, high ranking and low (every one)!
Thus have I quyt the Millere in my tale.
Thus have I repaid the Miller in my tale.
Heere is ended the Reves Tale.
Here ends the Reeves Tale.
