The Prologe of the Somonours Tale.
The Prologue of the Summoner's Tale
This Somonour in his styropes hye stood;
This Summoner in his stirrups stood high;
Upon this Frere his herte was so wood
Upon this Friar his heart was so enraged
That lyk an aspen leef he quook for ire.
That like an aspen leaf he quaked for ire.
"Lordynges," quod he, "but o thyng I desire;
"Gentlemen," said he, "but one thing I desire;
I yow biseke that, of youre curteisye,
I you beseech that, of your courtesy,
Syn ye han herd this false Frere lye,
Since you have heard this false Friar lie,
As suffreth me I may my tale telle.
Now grant me that me I may tell my tale.
This Frere bosteth that he knoweth helle,
This Friar boasts that he knows hell,
And God it woot, that it is litel wonder;
And God knows it, that it is little wonder;
Freres and feendes been but lyte asonder.
Friars and fiends are but little different.
For, pardee, ye han ofte tyme herd telle
For, by God, you have often times heard tell
How that a frere ravysshed was to helle
How a friar was carried off to hell
In spirit ones by a visioun;
In spirit once by a vision;
And as an angel ladde hym up and doun,
And as an angel led him up and down,
To shewen hym the peynes that ther were,
To show him the pains that were there,
In al the place saugh he nat a frere;
In all the place saw he not a friar;
Of oother folk he saugh ynowe in wo.
Of other folk he saw enough in woe.
Unto this angel spak the frere tho:
Unto this angel spoke the friar then:
`Now, sire,' quod he, `han freres swich a grace
`Now, sir,' said he, `have friars such a grace
That noon of hem shal come to this place?'
That none of them shall come to this place?'
`Yis' quod this angel, `many a millioun!'
`Yes' said this angel, `many a million!'
And unto Sathanas he ladde hym doun.
And unto Satan he led him down.
`And now hath Sathanas,' seith he, `a tayl
`And now has Satan,' says he, `a tail
Brodder than of a carryk is the sayl.
Broader than of a large galleon is the sail.
Hold up thy tayl, thou Sathanas!' quod he;
Hold up thy tail, thou Satan!' said he;
`Shewe forth thyn ers, and lat the frere se
`Show forth thy ass, and let the friar see
Where is the nest of freres in this place!'
Where the nest of friars is in this place!'
And er that half a furlong wey of space,
And before half a furlong way of time (a few minutes),
Right so as bees out swarmen from an hyve,
Just as bees swarm out from a hive,
Out of the develes ers ther gonne dryve
Out of the devil's ass there began to rush
Twenty thousand freres on a route,
Twenty thousand friars in a crowd,
And thurghout helle swarmed al aboute,
And throughout hell swarmed all about,
And comen agayn as faste as they may gon,
And came back again as fast as they can go,
And in his ers they crepten everychon.
And in his ass they crept every one.
He clapte his tayl agayn and lay ful stille.
He clapped his tail again and lay very still.
This frere, whan he looked hadde his fille
This friar, when he had looked his fill
Upon the tormentz of this sory place,
Upon the torments of this sorry place,
His spirit God restored, of his grace,
His spirit God restored, by his grace,
Unto his body agayn, and he awook.
Unto his body again, and he awoke.
But natheles, for fere yet he quook,
But nonetheless, for fear yet he quaked,
So was the develes ers ay in his mynde,
So was the devil's ass always in his mind,
That is his heritage of verray kynde.
That is his true natural heritage.
God save yow alle, save this cursed Frere!
God save you all, except this cursed Friar!
My prologe wol I ende in this manere."
My prologue will I end in this manner."
Heere bigynneth the Somonour his Tale.
Here begins the Summoner's Tale.
Lordynges, ther is in Yorkshire, as I gesse,
Gentlemen, there is in Yorkshire, as I believe,
A mersshy contree called Holdernesse,
A marshy country called Holdernesse,
In which ther wente a lymytour aboute
In which there went a licensed beggar about
To preche, and eek to begge, it is no doute.
To preach, and also to beg, it is no doubt.
And so bifel that on a day this frere
And so befell that on a day this friar
Hadde preched at a chirche in his manere,
Had preached at a church in his manner,
And specially, aboven every thyng,
And specially, above every thing,
Excited he the peple in his prechyng
Excited he the people in his preaching
To trentals, and to yeve, for Goddes sake,
To masses for dead souls, and to give, for God's sake,
Wherwith men myghte hooly houses make,
The wherewithal that men might holy houses make,
Ther as divine servyce is honoured,
Where divine service is honored,
Nat ther as it is wasted and devoured,
Not where it is wasted and devoured,
Ne ther it nedeth nat for to be yive,
Nor where it needs not to be given,
As to possessioners, that mowen lyve,
As to beneficed clergymen, that may live,
Thanked be God, in wele and habundaunce.
Thanked be God, in prosperity and abundance.
"Trentals," seyde he, "deliveren fro penaunce
"Masses for souls," said he, "deliver from penance
Hir freendes soules, as wel olde as yonge --
Their friends' souls, as well old as young --
Ye, whan that they been hastily ysonge,
Yes, when they are hastily sung,
Nat for to holde a preest joly and gay --
Not to keep a priest jolly and gay --
He syngeth nat but o masse in a day.
He sings not but one masse in a day.
Delivereth out," quod he, "anon the soules!
Deliver out," said he, "immediately the souls!
Ful hard it is with flesshhook or with oules
Very hard it is with flesh hook or with awls
To been yclawed, or to brenne or bake.
To be clawed, or to burn or bake.
Now spede yow hastily, for Cristes sake!"
Now speed you hastily, for Christ's sake!"
And whan this frere had seyd al his entente,
And when this friar had said all he intended,
With qui cum patre forth his wey he wente.
With the prayer "who with the father" forth he went his way.
Whan folk in chirche had yeve him what hem leste,
When folk in church had given him what they wished,
He wente his wey; no lenger wolde he reste.
He went his way; no longer would he stay.
With scrippe and tipped staf, ytukked hye,
With satchel and metal-tipped staff, his robe tucked up high,
In every hous he gan to poure and prye,
In every house he began to peer and pry,
And beggeth mele and chese, or elles corn.
And begs meal and cheese, or else grain.
His felawe hadde a staf tipped with horn,
His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,
A peyre of tables al of yvory,
A pair of tablets all of ivory,
And a poyntel polysshed fetisly,
And a writing instrument polished carefully,
And wroot the names alwey, as he stood,
And wrote the names always, as he stood,
Of alle folk that yaf hym any good,
Of all folk that gave him any good thing,
Ascaunces that he wolde for hem preye.
As if he would for them pray.
"Yif us a busshel whete, malt, or reye,
"Give us a bushel of wheat, malt, or rye,
A Goddes kechyl, or a trype of chese,
A little cake, or a bit of cheese,
Or elles what yow lyst, we may nat cheese;
Or else what you like, we may not choose;
A Goddes halfpeny, or a masse peny,
A God's halfpenny, or a mass penny,
Or yif us of youre brawn, if ye have eny;
Or give us some of your meat, if you have any;
A dagon of youre blanket, leeve dame,
A piece of your woolen cloth, dear lady,
Oure suster deere -- lo! Heere I write youre name --
Our sister dear -- lo! Here I write your name --
Bacon or beef, or swich thyng as ye fynde."
Bacon or beef, or such thing as you find."
A sturdy harlot wente ay hem bihynde,
A sturdy rascal went always behind them,
That was hir hostes man, and bar a sak,
Who was their host's man, and bore a sack,
And what men yaf hem, leyde it on his bak.
And what men gave them, laid it on his back.
And whan that he was out at dore, anon
And when he was out at door, immediately
He planed awey the names everichon
He planed away the names every one
That he biforn had writen in his tables;
That he before had written in his tables;
He served hem with nyfles and with fables.
He served them with tricks and with falsehoods.
"Nay, ther thou lixt, thou Somonour!" quod the Frere.
"Nay, there thou lie, thou Summoner!" said the Friar.
"Pees," quod oure Hoost, "for Cristes mooder deere!
"Quiet," said our Host, "for Christ's mother dear!
Tel forth thy tale, and spare it nat at al."
Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at al."
"So thryve I," quod this Somonour, "so I shal!"
"As I may thrive," said this Summoner, "so I shall!"
So longe he wente, hous by hous, til he
So long he went, house by house, until he
Cam til an hous ther he was wont to be
Came to a house where he was accustomed to be
Refresshed moore than in an hundred placis.
Hospitably received more than in a hundred places.
Syk lay the goode man whos that the place is;
Sick lay the good man whose the place is;
Bedrede upon a couche lowe he lay.
Bedridden upon a couch low he lay.
"Deus hic!" quod he, "O Thomas, freend, good day!"
"God be here!" said he, "Oh Thomas, friend, good day!"
Seyde this frere, curteisly and softe.
Said this friar, courteously and soft.
"Thomas," quod he, "God yelde yow! Ful ofte
"Thomas," said he, "God reward you! Very often
Have I upon this bench faren ful weel;
Have I upon this bench fared full well;
Heere have I eten many a myrie meel."
Here have I eaten many a merry meal."
And fro the bench he droof awey the cat,
And from the bench he drove away the cat,
And leyde adoun his potente and his hat,
And laid down his walking stick and his hat,
And eek his scrippe, and sette hym softe adoun.
And also his satchel, and set him softly down.
His felawe was go walked into toun
His fellow had gone walking into town
Forth with his knave, into that hostelrye
Forth with his knave, into that hostelry
Where as he shoop hym thilke nyght to lye.
Where he intended that night to lie.
"O deere maister," quod this sike man,
"Oh dear master," said this sick man,
"How han ye fare sith that March bigan?
"How have you fared since March began?
I saugh yow noght this fourtenyght or moore."
I saw you not this fortnight or more."
"God woot," quod he, "laboured I have ful soore,
"God knows," said he, "labored I have very hard,
And specially for thy savacion
And especially for thy salvation
Have I seyd many a precious orison,
Have I said many a precious prayer,
And for oure othere freendes, God hem blesse!
And for our other friends, God them bless!
I have to day been at youre chirche at messe,
I have today been at your church at mass,
And seyd a sermon after my symple wit --
And said a sermon insofar as my simple wit allowed --
Nat al after the text of hooly writ,
Not entirely according to the text of holy writ,
For it is hard to yow, as I suppose,
For it is hard for you, as I suppose,
And therfore wol I teche yow al the glose.
And therefore will I teach you all the interpretation.
Glosynge is a glorious thyng, certeyn,
Interpreting scripture is a glorious thing, certainly,
For lettre sleeth, so as we clerkes seyn --
For letter slays, so we clerks say --
There have I taught hem to be charitable,
There have I taught them to be charitable,
And spende hir good ther it is resonable;
And spend their goods where it is reasonable;
And there I saugh oure dame -- A! Where is she?"
And there I saw our lady -- Ah! Where is she?"
"Yond in the yerd I trowe that she be,"
"Yonder in the yard I believe that she be,"
Seyde this man, "and she wol come anon."
Said this man, "and she will come anon."
"Ey, maister, welcome be ye, by Seint John!"
"Ey, master, welcome are you, by Saint John!"
Seyde this wyf, "How fare ye, hertely?"
Said this wife, "How fare you, cordially (I ask)?"
The frere ariseth up ful curteisly,
The friar arises up full courteously,
And hire embraceth in his armes narwe,
And her embraces in his arms tightly,
And kiste hire sweete, and chirketh as a sparwe
And kissed her sweetly, and chirps like a sparrow
With his lyppes: "Dame," quod he, "right weel,
With his lips: "Lady," said he, "right well,
As he that is youre servant every deel,
As he who is your servant every bit,
Thanked be God, that yow yaf soule and lyf!
Thanked be God, who gave you soul and life!
Yet saugh I nat this day so fair a wyf
Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife
In al the chirche, God so save me!"
In all the church, as God may save me!"
"Ye, God amende defautes, sire," quod she.
"Yes, God correct my faults, sir," said she.
"Algates, welcome be ye, by my fey!"
"At any rate, welcome are you, by my faith!"
"Graunt mercy, dame, this have I founde alwey.
"Great thanks, lady, this have I found always.
But of youre grete goodnesse, by youre leve,
But of your great goodness, by your leave,
I wolde prey yow that ye nat yow greve,
I would pray you that you be not annoyed,
I wole with Thomas speke a litel throwe.
I will with Thomas speak a little while.
Thise curatz been ful necligent and slowe
These curates are very negligent and slow
To grope tendrely a conscience
To examine gently a conscience
In shrift; in prechyng is my diligence,
In confession; in preaching is my diligence,
And studie in Petres wordes and in Poules.
And study in Peter's words and in Paul's.
I walke and fisshe Cristen mennes soules
I walk and fish Christian men's souls
To yelden Jhesu Crist his propre rente;
To pay Jesus Christ his proper income;
To sprede his word is set al myn entente."
To spread his word is set all my intention."
"Now, by youre leve, o deere sire," quod she,
"Now, by your leave, oh dear sir," said she,
"Chideth him weel, for seinte Trinitee!
"Chide him well, for the Holy Trinity!
He is as angry as a pissemyre,
He is as angry as a pismire,
Though that he have al that he kan desire;
Though he have all that he can desire;
Though I hym wrye a-nyght and make hym warm,
Though I cover him at night and make him warm,
And over hym leye my leg outher myn arm,
And over him lay my leg or my arm,
He groneth lyk oure boor, lith in oure sty.
He groans like our boor, that lies in our sty.
Oother desport right noon of hym have I;
Other pleasure right none of him have I;
I may nat plese hym in no maner cas."
I can not please him in any sort of way."
"O Thomas, je vous dy, Thomas! Thomas!
"Oh Thomas, I tell you, Thomas! Thomas!
This maketh the feend; this moste ben amended.
This makes the fiend; this must be amended.
Ire is a thyng that hye God defended,
Ire is a thing that high God forbad,
And therof wol I speke a word or two."
And thereof will I speak a word or two."
"Now, maister," quod the wyf, "er that I go,
"Now, master," said the wife, "before I go,
What wol ye dyne? I wol go theraboute."
What will you dine? I will go work on that."
"Now, dame," quod he, "now je vous dy sanz doute,
"Now, lady," said he, "now I tell you without doubt
Have I nat of a capon but the lyvere,
Have I of a capon only the liver,
And of youre softe breed nat but a shyvere,
And of your soft breed nothing but a sliver,
And after that a rosted pigges heed --
And after that a roasted pig's head --
But that I nolde no beest for me were deed --
But that I would that no beast for me were dead --
Thanne hadde I with yow hoomly suffisaunce.
Then had I with you enough plain food.
I am a man of litel sustenaunce;
I am a man who needs little sustenance;
My spirit hath his fostryng in the Bible.
My spirit has its nourishment in the Bible.
The body is ay so redy and penyble
The body is always so ready and accustomed
To wake, that my stomak is destroyed.
To staying awake (to pray), that my stomach is destroyed.
I prey yow, dame, ye be nat anoyed,
I pray you, lady, that you be not annoyed,
Though I so freendly yow my conseil shewe.
Though I so friendly show you my private affairs.
By God! I wolde nat telle it but a fewe."
By God! I would not tell it but to a few."
"Now, sire," quod she, "but o word er I go.
"Now, sir," said she, "but one word before I go.
My child is deed withinne thise wykes two,
My child is dead within these weeks two,
Soone after that ye wente out of this toun."
Soon after you went out of this town."
"His deeth saugh I by revelacioun,"
"His death saw I by revelation,"
Seide this frere, "at hoom in oure dortour.
Said this friar, "at home in our dormitory.
I dar wel seyn that, er that half an hour
I dare well say that, before half an hour
After his deeth, I saugh hym born to blisse
After his death, I saw him carried up to bliss
In myn avision, so God me wisse!
In my vision, as God may guide me!
So dide oure sexteyn and oure fermerer,
So did our sacristan and the head of our infirmary,
That han been trewe freres fifty yeer;
That have been true friars fifty years;
They may now -- God be thanked of his loone! --
They may now -- God be thanked of his grace! --
Maken hir jubilee and walke allone.
Make their fiftieth anniversary and walk alone.
And up I roos, and al oure covent eke,
And up I rose, and all our convent as well,
With many a teere trillyng on my cheke,
With many a tear tricking on my cheek,
Withouten noyse or claterynge of belles;
Without noise or clattering of bells;
Te Deum was oure song, and nothyng elles,
Te Deum was our song, and nothing else,
Save that to Crist I seyde an orison,
Except that to Christ I said a prayer,
Thankynge hym of his revelacion.
Thanking him for his revelation.
For, sire and dame, trusteth me right weel,
For, sir and lady, trust me right well,
Oure orisons been moore effectueel,
Our prayers are more effectual,
And moore we seen of Cristes secree thynges,
And more we see of Christ's secret things,
Than burel folk, although they weren kynges.
Than secular folk, although they were kings.
We lyve in poverte and in abstinence,
We live in poverty and in abstinence,
And burell folk in richesse and despence
And secular folk in riches and expenditures
Of mete and drynke, and in hir foul delit.
Of food and drink, and in their foul delight.
We han this worldes lust al in despit.
We hold this world's lust all in scorn.
Lazar and Dives lyveden diversly,
Lazar and Dives lived diversely,
And divers gerdon hadden they therby.
And diverse rewards had they thereby.
Whoso wol preye, he moot faste and be clene,
Whoever will pray, he must fast and be pure,
And fatte his soule, and make his body lene.
And fatten his soul, and make his body lean.
We fare as seith th' apostle; clooth and foode
We fare as says the apostle; cloth and food
Suffisen us, though they be nat ful goode.
Suffice us, though they are not full good.
The clennesse and the fastynge of us freres
The purity and the fasting of us friars
Maketh that Crist accepteth oure preyeres.
Makes that Christ accepts our prayers.
"Lo, Moyses fourty dayes and fourty nyght
"Lo, Moses forty days and forty nights
Fasted, er that the heighe God of myght
Fasted, before the high God of might
Spak with hym in the mountayne of Synay.
Spoke with him in the mountain of Sinai.
With empty wombe, fastynge many a day,
With empty belly, fasting many a day,
Receyved he the lawe that was writen
Received he the law that was written
With Goddes fynger; and Elye, wel ye witen,
With God's finger; and Elijah, you know well,
In mount Oreb, er he hadde any speche
In mount Horeb, before he had any speech
With hye God, that is oure lyves leche,
With high God, who is our life's physician,
He fasted longe and was in contemplaunce.
He fasted long and was in meditation.
"Aaron, that hadde the temple in governaunce,
"Aaron, who had the temple in governance,
And eek the othere preestes everichon,
And also the other priests every one,
Into the temple whan they sholde gon
Into the temple when they should go
To preye for the peple and do servyse,
To pray for the people and do service,
They nolden drynken in no maner wyse
They would not drink in any sort of way
No drynke which that myghte hem dronke make,
Any drink which might make them drunk,
But there in abstinence preye and wake,
But there in abstinence pray and keep vigil,
Lest that they deyden. Taak heede what I seye!
Lest they died. Take heed what I say!
But they be sobre that for the peple preye,
Unless they are sober who for the people pray,
War that -- I seye namoore, for it suffiseth.
Beware that -- I say no more, for it suffices.
"Oure Lord Jhesu, as hooly writ devyseth,
"Our Lord Jesus, as holy writ devises,
Yaf us ensample of fastynge and preyeres.
Gave us an example of fasting and prayers.
Therfore we mendynantz, we sely freres,
Therefore we mendicants, we innocent friars,
Been wedded to poverte and continence,
Are wedded to poverty and chastity,
To charite, humblesse, and abstinence,
To charity, humility, and abstinence,
To persecucioun for rightwisnesse,
To persecution for righteousness,
To wepynge, misericorde, and clennesse.
To weeping, charity, and purity.
And therfore may ye se that oure preyeres --
And therefore may you see that our prayers --
I speke of us, we mendynantz, we freres --
I speak of us, we mendicants, we friars --
Been to the hye God moore acceptable
Are to the high God more acceptable
Than youres, with youre feestes at the table.
Than yours, with your feasts at the table.
Fro Paradys first, if I shal nat lye,
From Paradise first, if I shall not lie,
Was man out chaced for his glotonye;
Was man chased out for his gluttony;
And chaast was man in Paradys, certeyn.
And chaste was man in Paradise, certainly.
"But herkne now, Thomas, what I shal seyn.
"But hearken now, Thomas, what I shall say.
I ne have no text of it, as I suppose,
I have no text for it, as I suppose,
But I shal fynde it in a maner glose,
But I shall find it in some sort of gloss (interpretation),
That specially oure sweete Lord Jhesus
That especially our sweet Lord Jesus
Spak this by freres, whan he seyde thus:
Spoke this about friars, when he said thus:
`Blessed be they that povere in spirit been.'
`Blessed are they who are poor in spirit.'
And so forth al the gospel may ye seen,
And so forth all the gospel may you see,
Wher it be likker oure professioun,
Whether it is more like our profession,
Or hirs that swymmen in possessioun.
Or theirs who swim in possessions.
Fy on hire pompe and on hire glotonye!
Fie on their pomp and on their gluttony!
And for hir lewednesse I hem diffye.
And for their ignorance I scorn them.
"Me thynketh they been lyk Jovinyan,
"I think they are like Jovinian,
Fat as a whale, and walkynge as a swan,
Fat as a whale, and waddling like a swan,
Al vinolent as botel in the spence.
As full of wine as a bottle in the pantry.
Hir preyere is of ful greet reverence,
Their prayer is of full great reverence,
Whan they for soules seye the psalm of Davit:
When they for souls say the psalm of David:
Lo, `buf!' they seye, `cor meum eructavit!'
Lo, `buf!' they say (belch), `my heart has uttered' (a good word)!
Who folweth Cristes gospel and his foore,
Who follows Christ's gospel and his path,
But we that humble been, and chaast, and poore,
But we who are humble, and chaste, and poor,
Werkeris of Goddes word, nat auditours?
Workers of God's word, not mere listeners?
Therfore, right as an hauk up at a sours
Therefore, just as a hawk upon an upward flight
Up springeth into th' eir, right so prayeres
Up springs into the' air, right so prayers
Of charitable and chaste bisy freres
Of charitable and chaste busy friars
Maken hir sours to Goddes eres two.
Make their upward flight to God's two ears.
Thomas, Thomas! So moote I ryde or go,
Thomas, Thomas! As I may ride or walk,
And by that lord that clepid is Seint Yve,
And by that lord who is called Saint Yve,
Nere thou oure brother, sholdestou nat thryve.
Were thou not our brother, thou shouldest not thrive.
In our chapitre praye we day and nyght
In our assembly we pray day and night
To Crist, that he thee sende heele and myght
To Christ, that he send thee health and strength
Thy body for to weelden hastily."
Thy body to move with ease hastily."
"God woot," quod he, "no thyng therof feele I!
"God knows," said he, "no thing thereof feel I!
As help me Crist, as I in fewe yeres,
So help me Christ, I in few years,
Have spent upon diverse manere freres
Have spent upon different sorts of friars
Ful many a pound; yet fare I never the bet.
Very many a pound; yet fare I never the better.
Certeyn, my good have I almoost biset.
Certainly, I have almost spent all my goods.
Farwel, my gold, for it is al ago!"
Farewell, my gold, for it is all gone!"
The frere answerde, "O Thomas, dostow so?
The friar answered, "Oh Thomas, dost thou so?
What nedeth yow diverse freres seche?
Why do you need to seek various friars?
What nedeth hym that hath a parfit leche
Why does one who has a perfect physician need
To sechen othere leches in the toun?
To seek other physicians in the town?
Youre inconstance is youre confusioun.
Your inconstancy is your ruin.
Holde ye thanne me, or elles oure covent,
Consider you then me, or else our convent,
To praye for yow been insufficient?
To be insufficient to pray for you?
Thomas, that jape nys nat worth a myte.
Thomas, that trick is not worth a half a farthing.
Youre maladye is for we han to lyte.
Your malady is because we have too little.
A, yif that covent half a quarter otes!
Ah, give that convent half a quarter (four bushels) oats!
A, yif that covent foure and twenty grotes!
A, give that convent four and twenty groats (four pences)!
A, yif that frere a peny, and lat hym go!
A, give that friar a penny, and let him go!
Nay, nay, Thomas, it may no thyng be so!
Nay, nay, Thomas, it may in no way be so!
What is a ferthyng worth parted in twelve?
What is a farthing worth divided into twelve?
Lo, ech thyng that is oned in himselve
Lo, each thing that is united in itself
Is moore strong than whan it is toscatered.
Is more strong than when it is all scattered.
Thomas, of me thou shalt nat been yflatered;
Thomas, by me thou shalt not be flattered;
Thou woldest han oure labour al for noght.
Thou wouldest have our labor all for nothing.
The hye God, that al this world hath wroght,
The high God, who all this world has wrought,
Seith that the werkman worthy is his hyre.
Says that the workman is worthy of his hire.
Thomas, noght of youre tresor I desire
Thomas, I do not desire any of your treasure
As for myself, but that al oure covent
For myself, but because all our convent
To preye for yow is ay so diligent,
To pray for you is always so diligent,
And for to buylden Cristes owene chirche.
And to build Christ's own church.
Thomas, if ye wol lernen for to wirche,
Thomas, if you want to learn what to do,
Of buyldynge up of chirches may ye fynde
Concerning building up of churches you can find
If it be good in Thomas lyf of Inde.
If it be good in the life of Thomas of India.
Ye lye heere ful of anger and of ire,
You lie here full of anger and of ire,
With which the devel set youre herte afyre,
With which the devil set your heart afire,
And chiden heere the sely innocent,
And chide here the poor innocent,
Youre wyf, that is so meke and pacient.
Your wife, who is so meek and patient.
And therfore, Thomas, trowe me if thee leste,
And therefore, Thomas, believe me if thou wish,
Ne stryve nat with thy wyf, as for thy beste;
Strive not with thy wife, for thine own good;
And ber this word awey now, by thy feith;
And bear this word away now, by thy faith;
Touchynge swich thyng, lo, what the wise seith:
Concerning such thing, lo, what the wise man says:
`Withinne thyn hous ne be thou no leon;
`Within thy house be thou no lion;
To thy subgitz do noon oppression,
To thy subjects do no oppression,
Ne make thyne aqueyntances nat to flee.'
Nor make thy acquaintances to flee.'
And, Thomas, yet eft-soones I charge thee,
And, Thomas, yet again I command thee,
Be war from Ire that in thy bosom slepeth;
Beware of Ire that in thy bosom sleeps;
War fro the serpent that so slily crepeth
Beware of the serpent that so slyly creeps
Under the gras and styngeth subtilly.
Under the grass and stings subtly.
Be war, my sone, and herkne paciently
Beware, my son, and hearken patiently
That twenty thousand men han lost hir lyves
That twenty thousand men have lost their lives
For stryvyng with hir lemmans and hir wyves.
For striving with their sweethearts and their wives.
Now sith ye han so hooly meke a wyf,
Now since you have so holy meek a wife,
What nedeth yow, Thomas, to maken stryf?
Why do you need, Thomas, to make strife?
Ther nys, ywys, no serpent so cruel,
There is, indeed, no serpent so cruel,
Whan man tret on his tayl, ne half so fel,
When man treads on his tail, nor half so fierce,
As womman is, whan she hath caught an ire;
As woman is, when she has become angry;
Vengeance is thanne al that they desire.
Vengeance is then all that they desire.
Ire is a synne, oon of the grete of sevene,
Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven,
Abhomynable unto the God of hevene;
Abominable unto the God of heaven;
And to hymself it is destruccion.
And to himself it is destruction.
This every lewed viker or person
This every ignorant vicar or parson
Kan seye, how ire engendreth homycide.
Can say, how ire engenders homicide.
Ire is, in sooth, executour of pryde.
Ire is, in truth, executor of pride.
I koude of ire seye so muche sorwe,
I could of ire say so much sorrow,
My tale sholde laste til to-morwe.
My tale should last until to-morrow.
And therfore preye I God bothe day and nyght
And therefore pray I God both day and night
An irous man, God sende hym litel myght!
An angry man, God send him little power!
It is greet harm and certes greet pitee
It is great harm and certainly great pity
To sette an irous man in heigh degree.
To set an angry man in high position.
"Whilom ther was an irous potestat,
"Once there was an angry potentate,
As seith Senek, that, durynge his estaat,
As says Seneca, who, during his reign,
Upon a day out ryden knyghtes two,
Upon a day out rode two knights,
And as Fortune wolde that it were so,
And as Fortune would that it were so,
That oon of hem cam hoom, that oother noght.
That one of them came home, that other did not.
Anon the knyght bifore the juge is broght,
At once the knight is brought before the judge,
That seyde thus, `Thou hast thy felawe slayn,
Who said thus, `Thou hast thy fellow slain,
For which I deme thee to the deeth, certayn.'
For which I condemn thee to the death, certainly.'
And to another knyght comanded he,
And to another knight commanded he,
`Go lede hym to the deeth, I charge thee.'
`Go lead him to the death, I charge thee.'
And happed, as they wente by the weye
And it happened, as they went by the way
Toward the place ther he sholde deye,
Toward the place where he should die,
The knyght cam which men wenden had be deed.
The knight came who men believed had been dead.
Thanne thoughte they it were the beste reed
Then thought they it would be the best plan
To lede hem bothe to the juge agayn.
To lead them both to the judge again.
They seiden, `Lord, the knyght ne hath nat slayn
They said, `Lord, the knight has not slain
His felawe; heere he standeth hool alyve.'
His fellow; here he stands whole and alive.'
`Ye shul be deed,' quod he, `so moot I thryve!
`You shall be dead,' said he, `as I may thrive!
That is to seyn, bothe oon, and two, and thre!'
That is to say, both one, and two, and three!'
And to the firste knyght right thus spak he,
And to the first knight right thus spoke he,
`I dampned thee; thou most algate be deed.
`I condemned thee; thou must therefore be dead.
And thou also most nedes lese thyn heed,
And thou also must of necessity lose thy head,
For thou art cause why thy felawe deyth.'
For thou art the cause why thy fellow dies.'
And to the thridde knyght right thus he seith,
And to the third knight right thus he says,
`Thou hast nat doon that I comanded thee.'
`Thou hast not done what I commanded thee.'
And thus he dide doon sleen hem alle thre.
And thus he caused them all three to be slain.
"Irous Cambises was eek dronkelewe,
"Angry Cambises was also a drunkard,
And ay delited hym to been a shrewe.
And it always delighted him to be a scoundrel.
And so bifel, a lord of his meynee
And as it happened, a lord of his household
That loved vertuous moralitee
Who loved virtuous morality
Seyde on a day bitwix hem two right thus:
Said on a day betwixt them two right thus:
"`A lord is lost, if he be vicius;
"`A lord is lost, if he be vicious;
And dronkenesse is eek a foul record
And drunkenness is also a foul reputation
Of any man, and namely in a lord.
Of any man, and especially in a lord.
Ther is ful many an eye and many an ere
There is full many an eye and many an ear
Awaityng on a lord, and he noot where.
Watching a lord, and he knows not where.
For Goddes love, drynk moore attemprely!
For God's love, drink more temperately!
Wyn maketh man to lesen wrecchedly
Wine makes man to lose wretchedly
His mynde and eek his lymes everichon.'
His mind and also his limbs every one.'
"`The revers shaltou se,' quod he, `anon,
"`The reverse shalt thou see,' said he, `right now,
And preve it by thyn owene experience,
And prove it by thy own experience,
That wyn ne dooth to folk no swich offence.
That wine does to folk no such offence.
Ther is no wyn bireveth me my myght
There is no wine that deprives me of my power
Of hand ne foot, ne of myne eyen sight.'
Of hand nor foot, nor of my eyesight.'
And for despit he drank ful muchel moore,
And for spite he drank very much more,
An hondred part, than he hadde don bifoore;
By a hundred times, than he had done before;
And right anon this irous, cursed wrecche
And right away this angry, cursed wretch
Leet this knyghtes sone bifore hym fecche,
Had this knight's son fetched before him,
Comandynge hym he sholde bifore hym stonde.
Commanding him he should before him stand.
And sodeynly he took his bowe in honde,
And suddenly he took his bow in hand,
And up the streng he pulled to his ere,
And up the string he pulled to his ear,
And with an arwe he slow the child right there.
And with an arrow he slew the child right there.
`Now wheither have I a siker hand or noon?'
`Now tell me whether I have a sure hand or not?'
Quod he; `Is al my myght and mynde agon?
Said he; `Is all my power and mind gone?
Hath wyn bireved me myn eyen sight?'
Has wine bereft me of my eyesight?'
What sholde I telle th' answere of the knyght?
Why should I tell the answer of the knight?
His sone was slayn; ther is namoore to seye.
His son was slain; there is no more to say.
Beth war, therfore, with lordes how ye pleye.
Beware, therefore, how you act with lords.
Syngeth Placebo and `I shal, if I kan,'
Sing 'I shall please' and `I shall, if I can,'
But if it be unto a povre man.
Unless it be unto a poor man.
To a povre man men sholde his vices telle,
To a poor man one should tell his vices,
But nat to a lord, thogh he sholde go to helle.
But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.
"Lo irous Cirus, thilke Percien,
"Lo angry Cyrus, that Persian,
How he destroyed the ryver of Gysen,
How he destroyed the river of Gysen,
For that an hors of his was dreynt therinne,
Because a horse of his was drowned therein,
Whan that he wente Babiloigne to wynne.
When he went to conquer Babylon.
He made that the ryver was so smal
He made it that the river was so small
That wommen myghte wade it over al.
That women could wade it everywhere.
Lo, what seyde he that so wel teche kan?
Lo, what said he who so well can teach?
`Ne be no felawe to an irous man,
`Be no fellow to an angry man,
Ne with no wood man walke by the weye,
Nor with no enraged man walk by the way,
Lest thee repente;' I wol no ferther seye.
Lest thee repent;' I will no further say.
"Now, Thomas, leeve brother, lef thyn ire;
"Now, Thomas, dear brother, leave thine ire;
Thou shalt me fynde as just as is a squyre.
Thou shalt me find as true as is a carpenter's square.
Hoold nat the develes knyf ay at thyn herte --
Hold not the devil's knife always at thy heart --
Thyn angre dooth thee al to soore smerte --
Thine anger causes thee all too sorely to suffer --
But shewe to me al thy confessioun."
But show to me all thy confession."
"Nay," quod the sike man, "by Seint Symoun!
"Nay," said the sick man, "by Saint Symoun!
I have be shryven this day at my curat.
I have been shriven this day by my curate.
I have hym toold hoolly al myn estat;
I have him told completely all my condition;
Nedeth namoore to speken of it," seith he,
It needs no more to speak of it," says he,
"But if me list, of myn humylitee."
"Unless I so wish, out of my humility."
"Yif me thanne of thy gold, to make oure cloystre,"
"Give me then of thy gold, to make our cloister,"
Quod he, "for many a muscle and many an oystre,
Said he, "for many a mussel and many an oyster,
Whan othere men han ben ful wel at eyse,
When other men have been full well at ease,
Hath been oure foode, our cloystre for to reyse.
Have been our food, our cloister to erect.
And yet, God woot, unnethe the fundement
And yet, God knows, hardly the foundation
Parfourned is, ne of our pavement
Is finished, nor of our pavement
Nys nat a tyle yet withinne oure wones.
There is not a tile yet within our dwelling.
By God, we owen fourty pound for stones.
By God, we owe forty pounds for stones.
"Now help, Thomas, for hym that harwed helle!
"Now help, Thomas, for him who despoiled hell of its captives!
For elles moste we oure bookes selle.
For otherwise we must sell our books.
And if yow lakke oure predicacioun,
And if you lack our preaching,
Thanne goth the world al to destruccioun.
Then all the world goes to destruction.
For whoso wolde us fro this world bireve,
For whoever would rob us from this world,
So God me save, Thomas, by youre leve,
So save me God, Thomas, by your leave,
He wolde bireve out of this world the sonne.
He would take the sun out of this world.
For who kan teche and werchen as we konne?
For who can teach and work as we know how?
And that is nat of litel tyme," quod he,
And that is not of recent times," said he,
"But syn Elye was, or Elise,
"But since Elijah was, or Elisha,
Han freres been -- that fynde I of record --
Have friars been -- that I find in the records --
In charitee, ythanked be oure Lord!
In charity, thanked be our Lord!
Now Thomas, help, for seinte charitee!"
Now Thomas, help, for holy charity!"
And doun anon he sette hym on his knee.
And down at once he set himself on his knee.
This sike man wax wel ny wood for ire;
This sick man grew well nigh mad for ire;
He wolde that the frere had been on-fire
He wished that the friar had been afire
With his false dissymulacioun.
With his false dissimulation.
"Swich thyng as is in my possessioun,"
"Such a thing as is in my possession,"
Quod he, "that may I yeve, and noon oother.
Said he, "that can I give, and none other.
Ye sey me thus, how that I am youre brother?"
You say me thus, that I am your brother?"
"Ye, certes," quod the frere, "trusteth weel.
"Yes, certainly," said the friar, "trust well.
I took oure dame oure lettre with oure seel."
I gave our lady our letter with our seal."
"Now wel," quod he, "and somwhat shal I yive
"Well now," said he, "and something shall I give
Unto youre hooly covent whil I lyve;
Unto your holy convent while I live;
And in thyn hand thou shalt it have anon,
And in thy hand thou shalt it have right now,
On this condicion, and oother noon,
On this condition, and none other,
That thou departe it so, my deere brother,
That thou divide it so, my dear brother,
That every frere have also muche as oother.
That every friar have as much as the other.
This shaltou swere on thy professioun,
This shalt thou swear on thy religious vows,
Withouten fraude or cavillacioun."
Without fraud or quibbling."
"I swere it," quod this frere, "by my feith!"
"I swear it," said this friar, "by my faith!"
And therwithal his hand in his he leith,
And therewith his hand in his he lays,
"Lo, heer my feith; in me shal be no lak."
"Lo, have here my faith; I shall not fail (to keep my word)."
"Now thanne, put in thyn hand doun by my bak,"
"Now then, put in thy hand down by my back,"
Seyde this man, "and grope wel bihynde.
Said this man, "and grope well behind.
Bynethe my buttok there shaltow fynde
Beneath my buttock where shalt thou find
A thyng that I have hyd in pryvetee."
A thing that I have hidden in private."
"A!" thoghte this frere, "That shal go with me!"
"Ah!" thought this friar, "That shall go with me!"
And doun his hand he launcheth to the clifte
And down his hand he thrusts to the cleft
In hope for to fynde there a yifte.
In hope to find there a gift.
And whan this sike man felte this frere
And when this sick man felt this friar
Aboute his tuwel grope there and heere,
About his anus grope there and here,
Amydde his hand he leet the frere a fart;
Amid his hand he let the friar a fart;
Ther nys no capul, drawynge in a cart,
There is no horse, pulling a cart,
That myghte have lete a fart of swich a soun.
That could have let a fart of such a sound.
The frere up stirte as dooth a wood leoun --
The friar up started as does a mad lion --
"A, false cherl," quod he, "for Goddes bones!
"Ah, false churl," said he, "for God's bones!
This hastow for despit doon for the nones.
This hast thou done on purpose for spite.
Thou shalt abye this fart, if that I may!"
Thou shalt pay for this fart, if I can (do so)!"
His meynee, whiche that herden this affray,
His servants, who heard this affray,
Cam lepynge in and chaced out the frere;
Came leaping in and chased out the friar;
And forth he gooth, with a ful angry cheere,
And forth he goes, with a very angry look,
And fette his felawe, ther as lay his stoor.
And fetched his fellow, where lay his store.
He looked as it were a wilde boor;
He looked like a wild boar;
He grynte with his teeth, so was he wrooth.
He gnashed his teeth, he was so angry.
A sturdy paas doun to the court he gooth,
At a rapid pace down to the court he goes,
Wher as ther woned a man of greet honour,
Where there dwelt a man of greet honor,
To whom that he was alwey confessour.
To whom he was always confessor.
This worthy man was lord of that village.
This worthy man was lord of that village.
This frere cam as he were in a rage,
This friar came as if he were in a rage,
Where as this lord sat etyng at his bord;
Where the lord sat eating at his table;
Unnethes myghte the frere speke a word,
Hardly could the friar speak a word,
Til atte laste he seyde, "God yow see!"
Until at the last he said, "God you see!"
This lord gan looke, and seide, "Benedicitee!
This lord did look, and said, "Bless me!
What, frere John, what maner world is this?
What, friar John, what sort of carrying on is this?
I se wel that som thyng ther is amys;
I see well that there is something amiss;
Ye looken as the wode were ful of thevys.
You look as if the wood were full of thieves.
Sit doun anon, and tel me what youre grief is,
Sit down right now, and tell me what your grief is,
And it shal been amended, if I may."
And it shall be amended, if I can."
"I have," quod he, "had a despit this day,
"I have," said he, "had an insult this day,
God yelde yow, adoun in youre village,
God reward you, down in your village,
That in this world is noon so povre a page
That in this world is none so poor a servant boy
That he nolde have abhomynacioun
That he would not be nauseated
Of that I have receyved in youre toun.
By what I have received in your town.
And yet ne greveth me nothyng so soore,
And yet there grieves me nothing so sore,
As that this olde cherl with lokkes hoore
As that this old churl with white locks
Blasphemed hath oure hooly covent eke."
Blasphemed has our holy convent as well."
"Now, maister," quod this lord, "I yow biseke --"
"Now, master," said this lord, "I you beseech --"
"No maister, sire," quod he, "but servitour,
"No master, sir," said he, "but servant,
Thogh I have had in scole that honour.
Though I have had in school that honor.
God liketh nat that `Raby' men us calle,
God likes not that `Rabbi' men us call,
Neither in market ne in youre large halle."
Neither in market nor in your large hall."
"No fors," quod he, "but tel me al youre grief."
"No matter," said he, "but tell me all your grief."
"Sire," quod this frere, "an odious meschief
"Sir," said this friar, "an odious mischief
This day bityd is to myn ordre and me,
This day has happened to my order and me,
And so, per consequens, to ech degree
And so, consequently, to each degree
Of hooly chirche -- God amende it soone!"
Of holy church -- God amend it soon!"
"Sire," quod the lord, "ye woot what is to doone.
"Sir," said the lord, "you know what is to be done.
Distempre yow noght; ye be my confessour;
Do not be angry; you are my confessor;
Ye been the salt of the erthe and the savour.
You are the salt of the earth and the delight.
For Goddes love, youre pacience ye holde!
For God's love, keep your patience!
Tel me youre grief." And he anon hym tolde,
Tell me your grief." And he straightway told him,
As ye han herd biforn -- ye woot wel what.
As you have heard before -- you know well what.
The lady of the hous ay stille sat
The lady of the house always still sat
Til she had herd what the frere sayde.
Until she had heard what the friar said.
"Ey, Goddes mooder," quod she, "Blisful mayde!
"Ey, God's mother," said she, "Blissful maid!
Is ther oght elles? Telle me feithfully."
Is there anything else? Tell me faithfully."
"Madame," quod he, "how thynke ye herby?"
"My lady," said he, "how think you of this?"
"How that me thynketh?" quod she. "So God me speede,
"How I think" said she. "So help me God,
I seye a cherl hath doon a cherles dede.
I say a churl has done a churl's deed.
What shold I seye? God lat hym nevere thee!
What should I say? God let him never prosper!
His sike heed is ful of vanytee;
His sick head is full of foolishness;
I holde hym in a manere frenesye."
I consider him in a sort of delirium."
"Madame," quod he, "by God, I shal nat lye,
"My lady," said he, "by God, I shall not lie,
But I on oother wyse may be wreke,
Unless I can be avenged in another manner,
I shal disclaundre hym over al ther I speke,
I shall defame him wherever I speak,
This false blasphemour that charged me
This false blasphemer who charged me
To parte that wol nat departed be
To divide that which will not be divided
To every man yliche, with meschaunce!"
Equally to every man, with bad luck (to him)!"
The lord sat stille as he were in a traunce,
The lord sat still as if he were in a trance,
And in his herte he rolled up and doun,
And in his heart he rolled up and down,
"How hadde this cherl ymaginacioun
"How had this churl imagination
To shewe swich a probleme to the frere?
To show such a problem to the friar?
Nevere erst er now herde I of swich mateere.
Never previously before now heard I of such a matter.
I trowe the devel putte it in his mynde.
I believe the devil put it in his mind.
In ars-metrike shal ther no man fynde,
In the art of measuring (arithmetic) shall there no man find,
Biforn this day, of swich a question.
Before this day, such a problem.
Who sholde make a demonstracion
Who should make a logical proof
That every man sholde have yliche his part
That every man should have equally his part
As of the soun or savour of a fart?
As of the sound or odor of a fart?
O nyce, proude cherl, I shrewe his face!
Oh ingenious, proud churl, I curse his face!
Lo, sires," quod the lord, "with harde grace!
Lo, sirs," said the lord, "with bad luck (to him)!
Who evere herde of swich a thyng er now?
Who ever heard of such a thing before now?
To every man ylike? Tel me how.
To every man equally? Tell me how.
It is an inpossible; it may nat be.
It is an impossibility; it can not be.
Ey, nyce cherl, God lete him nevere thee!
Ey, clever churl, God let him never prosper!
The rumblynge of a fart, and every soun,
The rumbling of a fart, and every sound,
Nis but of eir reverberacioun,
Is nothing but reverberation of air,
And evere it wasteth litel and litel awey.
And ever it wastes away little by little.
Ther is no man kan deemen, by my fey,
There is no man can judge, by my faith,
If that it were departed equally.
If it were divided equally.
What, lo, my cherl, lo, yet how shrewedly
What, lo, my churl, lo, yet how shrewdly
Unto my confessour to-day he spak!
Unto my confessor to-day he spoke!
I holde hym certeyn a demonyak!
I consider him certainly one possessed by a demon!
Now ete youre mete, and lat the cherl go pleye;
Now eat your food, and let the churl go play;
Lat hym go honge hymself a devel weye!"
Let him go hang himself in the devil's name!"
Now stood the lordes squier at the bord,
Now stood the lord's squire at the board,
That karf his mete, and herde word by word
Who carved his meat, and heard word by word
Of alle thynges whiche I have yow sayd.
Of all the things which I have told you.
"My lord," quod he, "be ye nat yvele apayd,
"My lord," said he, "if you be not displeased,
I koude telle, for a gowne-clooth,
I could tell, for a cloth to make a gown,
To yow, sire frere, so ye be nat wrooth,
To you, sir friar, providing you be not angry,
How that this fart sholde evene deled be
How this fart should evenly be divided
Among youre covent, if it lyked me."
Among your convent, if it pleased me."
"Tel," quod the lord, "and thou shalt have anon
"Tell," said the lord, "and thou shalt have straightway
A gowne-clooth, by God and by Seint John!"
A gown-cloth, by God and by Saint John!"
"My lord," quod he, "whan that the weder is fair,
"My lord," said he, "when the weather is fair,
Withouten wynd or perturbynge of air,
Without wind or disturbance of air,
Lat brynge a cartwheel heere into this halle;
Let a cartwheel be brought here into this hall;
But looke that it have his spokes alle --
But see that it has all its spokes --
Twelve spokes hath a cartwheel comunly.
Twelve spokes has a cartwheel commonly.
And bryng me thanne twelve freres. Woot ye why?
And bring me then twelve friars. Know you why?
For thrittene is a covent, as I gesse.
For thirteen is a convent, as I believe.
Youre confessour heere, for his worthynesse,
Your confessor here, for his worthiness,
Shal parfourne up the nombre of his covent.
Shall complete the number of his convent.
Thanne shal they knele doun, by oon assent,
Then shall they kneel down, all together,
And to every spokes ende, in this manere,
And to every spoke's end, in this manner,
Ful sadly leye his nose shal a frere.
A friar shall very firmly lay his nose.
Youre noble confessour -- there God hym save! --
Your noble confessor -- may God him save! --
Shal holde his nose upright under the nave.
Shall hold his nose upright under the nave.
Thanne shal this cherl, with bely stif and toght
Then shall this churl, with belly stiff and taut
As any tabour, hyder been ybroght;
As any drum, hither be brought;
And sette hym on the wheel right of this cart,
And set him right on the wheel of this cart,
Upon the nave, and make hym lete a fart.
Upon the nave, and make him let a fart.
And ye shul seen, up peril of my lyf,
And you shall see, on peril of my life (I swear),
By preeve which that is demonstratif,
By proof which is logical,
That equally the soun of it wol wende,
That equally the sound of it will go,
And eke the stynk, unto the spokes ende,
And also the stink, unto the spokes' ends,
Save that this worthy man, youre confessour,
Except that this worthy man, your confessor,
By cause he is a man of greet honour,
Because he is a man of greet honor,
Shal have the firste fruyt, as resoun is.
Shall have the first fruit, as is reasonable.
The noble usage of freres yet is this,
The noble usage of friars yet is this,
The worthy men of hem shul first be served;
The worthy men of them shall first be served;
And certeinly he hath it weel disserved.
And certainly he has it well deserved.
He hath to-day taught us so muche good
He has to-day taught us so much good
With prechyng in the pulpit ther he stood,
With preaching in the pulpit where he stood,
That I may vouche sauf, I sey for me,
That I can affirm, I say for me,
He hadde the firste smel of fartes thre;
He had the first smell of three farts;
And so wolde al his covent hardily,
And so would all his convent certainly (agree),
He bereth hym so faire and hoolily."
He bears him so faire and holily."
The lord, the lady, and ech man, save the frere,
The lord, the lady, and each man, except the friar,
Seyde that Jankyn spak, in this matere,
Said that Jankyn spoke, in this matter,
As wel as Euclide [dide] or Ptholomee.
As well as Euclid or Ptolemy.
Touchynge the cherl, they seyde, subtiltee
Concerning the churl, they said, shrewdness
And heigh wit made hym speken as he spak;
And great intelligence made him speak as he spoke;
He nys no fool, ne no demonyak.
He is no fool, nor possessed by any demon.
And Jankyn hath ywonne a newe gowne --
And Jankyn has won a new gown --
My tale is doon; we been almoost at towne.
My tale is done; we are almost at town.
Heere endeth the Somonours Tale.
Here ends the Summoner's Tale.
