A yong man called Melibeus, myghty and riche, bigat upon his wyf, that called was Prudence,	A young man called Melibeus, mighty and rich, begot upon his wife, who was called Prudence,
a doghter which that called was Sophie.	a daughter who was called Sophie.
Upon a day bifel that he for his desport is went into the feeldes hym to pleye.	Upon one day it happened that he for his pleasure went into the fields to amuse himself.
His wyf and eek his doghter hath he left inwith his hous, of which the dores weren faste yshette.	His wife and also his daughter has he left within his house of which the doors were tightly shut.
Thre of his olde foes han it espyed, and setten laddres to the walles of his hous,	Three of his old foes have seen this, and set ladders to the walls of his house,
and by wyndowes been entred,	and by windows have entered,
and betten his wyf, and wounded his doghter with fyve mortal woundes in fyve sondry places --	and beat his wife, and wounded his daughter with five mortal wounds in five different places --
this is to seyn, in hir feet, in hire handes, in hir erys, in hir nose,	this is to say, in her feet, in her hands, in her ears, in her nose,
and in hire mouth -- and leften hire for deed, and wenten awey.	and in her mouth -- and left her for dead, and went away.
Whan Melibeus retourned was into his hous, and saugh al this meschief, he,	When Melibeus had returned into his house, and saw all this mischief, he,
lyk a mad man rentynge his clothes, gan to wepe and crie.	like a mad man tearing his clothes, began to weep and cry.
Prudence, his wyf, as ferforth as she dorste, bisoghte hym of his wepyng for to stynte,	Prudence, his wife, insofar as she dared, besought him to stop his weeping.
but nat forthy he gan to crie and wepen evere lenger the moore.	but nevertheless he began to cry and the longer he wept the more he wept.
This noble wyf Prudence remembred hire upon the sentence of Ovide, in his book	This noble wife Prudence remembered the saying of Ovid, in his book
that cleped is the Remedie of Love, where as he seith,	that is called the Remedy of Love, where he says
"He is a fool that destourbeth the mooder to wepen in the deeth of hire child	"He is a fool that stops the mother from weeping on the death of her child
til she have wept hir fille as for a certein tyme,	until she has wept her fill as for a certain time,
and thanne shal man doon his diligence with amyable wordes hire to reconforte,	and then shall one do his best efforts with amiable words to comfort her,
and preyen hire of hir wepyng for to stynte."	and pray her of her weeping to stint."
For which resoun this noble wyf Prudence suffred hir housbonde	For which reason this noble wife Prudence allowed her husband
for to wepe and crie as for a certein space,	to weep and cry as for a certain amount of time,
and whan she saugh hir tyme, she seyde hym in this wise:	and when she saw her opportunity, she said to him in this manner:
"Allas, my lord," quod she, "why make ye youreself for to be lyk a fool?	"Alas, my lord," said she, "why do you make yourself to be like a fool?
For sothe it aperteneth nat to a wys man to maken swich a sorwe.	For truly it does not befit a wise man to make such a sorrow.
Youre doghter, with the grace of God, shal warisshe and escape.	Your daughter, with the grace of God, shall recover and escape.
And, al were it so that she right now were deed,	And, even if it were so that she right now were dead,
ye ne oughte nat, as for hir deeth, youreself to destroye.	you ought not, for her death, to destroy yourself.
Senek seith: `The wise man shal nat take to greet disconfort for the deeth of his children,	Seneca says: `The wise man shall not take too great discomfort for the death of his children,
but, certes, he sholde suffren it in pacience	but, certainly, he should suffer it in patience
as wel as he abideth the deeth of his owene propre persone.'"	as well as he abides the death of his own self.'"
This Melibeus answerde anon and seyde, "What man," quod he, "sholde of his wepyng stente	This Melibeus answered immediately and said, "What man," said he, "should stint of his weeping
that hath so greet a cause for to wepe?	who has such a good reason to weep?
Jhesu Crist, oure Lord, hymself wepte for the deeth of Lazarus hys freend."	Jesus Christ, our Lord, himself wept for the death of Lazarus his friend."
Prudence answerde: "Certes, wel I woot attempree wepyng is no thyng deffended to hym that sorweful is,	Prudence answered: "Certainly, I know well that moderate weeping is in no way forbidden to him who is sorrowful,
amonges folk in sorwe, but it is rather graunted hym to wepe.	amongst folk in sorrow, but it is rather granted to him to weep.
The Apostle Paul unto the Romayns writeth, `Man shal rejoyse	The Apostle Paul unto the Romans writes, `One shall rejoice
with hem that maken joye and wepen with swich folk as wepen.'	with those who make joy and weep with such folk as weep.'
But though attempree wepyng be ygraunted, outrageous wepyng certes is deffended.	But though moderate weeping is granted, excessive weeping certainly is forbidden.
Mesure of wepyng sholde be considered after the loore that techeth us Senek:	Moderation in weeping should be considered in the light of the lore that Seneca teaches us:
`Whan that thy frend is deed,' quod he, `lat nat thyne eyen to moyste been of teeris,	`When thy friend is dead,' said he, `let not thine eyes be too moist of tears,
ne to muche drye; although the teeris come to thyne eyen, lat hem nat falle;	nor too much dry; although the tears come to thine eyes, let them not fall;
and whan thou hast forgoon thy freend, do diligence to gete another freend;	and when thou hast lost thy friend, make an effort to get another friend;
and this is moore wysdom than for to wepe for thy freend	and this is more wisdom than to weep for thy friend
which that thou hast lorn, for therinne is no boote.'	whom thou hast lost, for therein is no remedy.'
And therfore, if ye governe yow by sapience, put awey sorwe out of youre herte.	And therefore, if you govern yourself by wisdom, put away sorrow out of your heart.
Remembre yow that Jhesus Syrak seith, `A man that is joyous and glad in herte,	Remember you that Jesus son of Sirach says, `A man that is joyous and glad in heart,
it hym conserveth florissynge in his age; but soothly sorweful herte maketh his bones drye.'	it conserves him flourishing in his age; but truly sorrowful heart makes his bones dry.'
He seith eek thus, that sorwe in herte sleeth ful many a man.	He says also thus, that sorrow in heart slays very many a man.
Salomon seith that right as motthes in the shepes flees anoyeth to the clothes,	Solomon says that just as moths in the sheep's fleece do harm to the clothes,
and the smale wormes to the tree, right so anoyeth sorwe to the herte.	and the small worms to the tree, just so sorrow does harm to the heart.
Wherfore us oghte, as wel in the deeth of oure children	Wherefore we should, as well in the death of our children
as in the los of oure othere goodes temporels, have pacience.	as in the loss of our other earthly goods, have patience.
Remembre yow upon the pacient Job. Whan he hadde lost his children and his temporeel substance,	Remember the patient Job. When he had lost his children and his earthly property,
and in his body endured and receyved ful many a grevous tribulacion, yet seyde he thus:	and in his body endured and received very many a grievous tribulation, yet said he thus:
`Oure Lord hath yeve it me; oure Lord hath biraft it me; right as oure Lord hath wold,	`Our Lord has given it to me; our Lord hath taken it from me; just as our Lord wished,
right so it is doon; blessed be the name of oure Lord!'"	just so it is done; blessed be the name of our Lord!'"
To thise forseide thynges answerde Melibeus unto his wyf Prudence: "Alle thy wordes," quod he,	To these foresaid things answered Melibeus unto his wife Prudence: "All thy words," said he,
"been sothe and therto profitable, but trewely myn herte is troubled with this sorwe	"are true and furthermore beneficial, but truly my heart is troubled with this sorrow
so grevously that I noot what to doone."	so grievously that I know not what to do."
"Lat calle," quod Prudence, "thy trewe freendes alle and thy lynage whiche that been wise. Telleth youre cas,	"Have summoned," said Prudence, "all thy true friends and of thy family those that are wise. Tell your case,
and herkneth what they seye in conseillyng, and yow governe after hire sentence.	and hearken what they say in advising, and govern yourself according to their advice."
Salomon seith, `Werk alle thy thynges by conseil, and thou shalt never repente.'"	Solomon says, `Do all thy business by taking advice, and thou shalt never repent.'"
Thanne, by the conseil of his wyf Prudence, this Melibeus leet callen a greet congregacion of folk,	Then, by the advice of his wife Prudence, this Melibeus had called up a great congregation of folk,
as surgiens, phisiciens, olde folk and yonge, and somme of his olde enemys reconsiled	such as surgeons, physicians, old folk and young, and some of his old enemies reconciled
as by hir semblaunt to his love and into his grace;	(as it seemed by their appearance) to his love and into his grace;
and therwithal ther coomen somme of his neighebores that diden hym reverence	and therewithal there came some of his neighbors that did him reverence
moore for drede than for love, as it happeth ofte.	more for dread than for love, as it often happens.
Ther coomen also ful many subtille flatereres and wise advocatz lerned in the lawe.	There came also very many subtle flatterers and wise advocates learned in the law.
And whan this folk togidre assembled weren, this Melibeus in sorweful wise shewed hem his cas.	And when this folk were assembled together, this Melibeus in sorrowful manner showed them his case.
And by the manere of his speche it semed that in herte he baar a crueel ire,	And by the manner of his speech it seemed that in heart he bore a cruel anger,
redy to doon vengeaunce upon his foes, and sodeynly desired that the werre sholde bigynne;	ready to do vengeance upon his foes, and desired that the war should begin very soon;
but nathelees, yet axed he hire conseil upon this matiere.	but nevertheless, yet he asked their advice upon this matter.
A surgien, by licence and assent of swiche as weren wise, up roos	A surgeon, by permission and assent of such as were wise, stood up
and to Melibeus seyde as ye may heere:	and to Melibeus said as you can hear:
"Sire," quod he, "as to us surgiens aperteneth that we do to every wight the beste that we kan,	"Sir," said he, "as to us surgeons it is our duty that we do to every person the best that we can,
where as we been withholde, and to oure pacientz that we do no damage,	where we are employed, and to our patients that we do no damage,
wherfore it happeth many tyme and ofte that whan twey men han everich wounded oother,	because of which it happens many times and often that when two men have each one wounded the other,
oon same surgien heeleth hem bothe;	one same surgeon heals them both;
wherfore unto oure art it is nat pertinent to norice werre ne parties to supporte.	therefore unto our art it is not fitting to nourish war nor to support warring factions.
But certes, as to the warisshynge of youre doghter, al be it so that she perilously be wounded,	But certainly, as to the curing of your daughter, although it be so that she is perilously wounded,
we shullen do so ententif bisynesse fro day to nyght that with the grace of God	we shall do such diligent work from day to night that with the grace of God
she shal be hool and sound as soone as is possible."	she shall be whole and sound as soon as is possible."
Almoost right in the same wise the phisiciens answerden, save that they seyden a fewe woordes moore:	Almost in just the same way the physicians answered, save that they said a few words more:
that right as maladies been cured by hir contraries, right so shul men warisshe werre by vengeaunce.	that just as maladies are cured by their contraries, just so shall men cure war by vengeance.
His neighebores ful of envye, his feyned freendes that semeden reconsiled, and his flatereres	His neighbors full of envy, his feigned friends that seemed reconciled, and his flatterers
maden semblant of wepyng, and empeireden and agreggeden muchel of this matiere in preisynge	made an outward show of weeping, and worsened and much aggravated this matter in praising
greetly Melibee of myght, of power, of richesse, and of freendes, despisynge the power of his adversaries,	greatly Melibee of might, of power, of riches, and of friends, despising the power of his adversaries,
and seiden outrely that he anon sholde wreken hym on his foes and bigynne werre.	and said flatly that he immediately should avenge himself on his foes and begin war.
Up roos thanne an advocat that was wys,	Up rose then an advocate that was wise,
by leve and by conseil of othere that were wise, and seide:	by leave and by advice of others that were wise, and said:
"Lordynges, the nede for which we been assembled in this place	"Gentlemen, the urgent matter for which we are assembled in this place
is a ful hevy thyng and an heigh matiere,	is a very serious thing and an important matter,
by cause of the wrong and of the wikkednesse that hath be doon,	because of the wrong and of the wickedness that has been done,
and eek by resoun of the grete damages that in tyme comynge	and also by reason of the great damages that in time coming
been possible to fallen for this same cause,	are possible to befall for this same cause,
and eek by resoun of the grete richesse and power of the parties bothe,	and also because of the great riches and power of both the parties,
for the whiche resouns it were a ful greet peril to erren in this matiere.	for the which reasons it would be a very great peril to err in this matter.
Wherfore, Melibeus, this is oure sentence: we conseille yow aboven alle thyng	Wherefore, Melibeus, this is our opinion: we advise you above all things
that right anon thou do thy diligence in kepynge of thy propre persone in swich a wise	that right away thou do thy best efforts in keeping of thy own self in such a way
that thou ne wante noon espie ne wacche thy persone for to save.	that thou not lack any spy nor guard in order to save thy person.
And after that, we conseille that in thyn hous thou sette sufficeant garnisoun	And after that, we advise that in thy house thou set sufficient garrison
so that they may as wel thy body as thyn hous defende.	so that they can defend as well thy body as thy house.
But certes, for to moeve werre, ne sodeynly for to doon vengeaunce, we may nat demen	But certainly, to begin war, or suddenly to do vengeance, we can not decide
in so litel tyme that it were profitable.	in so little time that it would be to our advantage.
Wherfore we axen leyser and espace to have deliberacion in this cas to deme.	Therefore we ask leisure and opportunity to have deliberation in this case to judge.
For the commune proverbe seith thus: `He that soone deemeth, soone shal repente.'	For the common proverb says thus: `He that soon judges, soon shall repent.'
And eek men seyn that thilke juge is wys that soone understondeth a matiere and juggeth by leyser;	And also men say that that judge is wise fhat soon understands a matter and judges at leisure;
for al be it so that alle tariyng be anoyful,	for although it be so that all tarrying is bothersome,
algates it is nat to repreve in yevynge of juggement ne in vengeance takyng,	it is not always to be reproved in giving of judgment nor in vengeance taking,
whan it is sufficeant and resonable.	when it is sufficient and reasonable.
And that shewed oure Lord Jhesu Crist by ensample, for whan that the womman that was taken in avowtrie	And that showed our Lord Jesus Christ by example, for when the woman that was taken in adultery
was broght in his presence to knowen what sholde be doon with hire persone, al be it so that	was brought in his presence to know what should be done with her person, although it be so that
he wiste wel hymself what that he wolde answere, yet ne wolde he nat answere sodeynly,	he knew well hmself what he would answer, yet he would not answer suddenly,
but he wolde have deliberacion, and in the ground he wroot twies.	but he would have deliberation, and in the ground he wrote twice.
And by thise causes we axen deliberacioun, and we shal thanne, by the grace of God, conseille thee	And by these causes we ask time for deliberation, and we shall then, by the grace of God, advise thee
thyng that shal be profitable."	something that shall be beneficial."
Up stirten thanne the yonge folk atones, and the mooste partie of that compaignye han scorned this olde wise	Up jumped then the young folk at once, and the most part of that company have scorned this old wise man
man, and bigonnen to make noyse, and seyden that	man, and began to make noise, and said that
right so as whil that iren is hoot men sholden smyte,	just so as while that iron is hot men should smite,
right so men sholde wreken hir wronges whil that they been fresshe and newe;	just so men should avenge their wrongs while they are fresh and new;
and with loud voys they criden "Werre! Werre!"	and with loud voice they cried "War! War!"
Up roos tho oon of thise olde wise, and with his hand made contenaunce that	Up rose then one of these old wise men, and with his hand made signal that
men sholde holden hem stille and yeven hym audience.	men should hold themselves still and give him audience.
"Lordynges," quod he, "ther is ful many a man that crieth `Werre, werre!'	"Gentlemen," said he, "there is very many a man that cries `War, war!'
that woot ful litel what werre amounteth.	who knows very little what war amounts to.
Werre at his bigynnyng hath so greet an entryng and so large that every wight may entre	War at its beginning has so big an entryway and so large that every person may enter
whan hym liketh and lightly fynde werre;	when he pleases and easily find war;
but certes what ende that shal therof bifalle, it is nat light to knowe.	but certainly what end that shall consequently befall, it is not easy to know.
For soothly, whan that werre is ones bigonne, ther is ful many a child unborn of his mooder	For truly, when war is once begun, there is very many a child unborn of his mother
that shal sterve yong by cause of thilke werre, or elles lyve in sorwe and dye in wrecchednesse.	that shall die young because of that same war, or else live in sorrow and die in wretchedness.
And therfore, er that any werre bigynne, men moste have greet conseil and greet deliberacion."	And therefore, ere any war begin, men must have much advice and much deliberation."
And whan this olde man wende to enforcen his tale by resons, wel ny alle atones bigonne they	And when this old man intended to reinforce his argument by reasons, well nigh all at once they began
to rise for to breken his tale, and beden hym ful ofte his wordes for to abregge.	to rise to interrupt his speech, and very often prayed him to abridge his argument.
For soothly, he that precheth to hem that listen nat heeren his wordes, his sermon hem anoieth.	For truly, he who preaches to those who do not want to hear his words, his sermon annoys them.
For Jhesus Syrak seith that "musik in wepynge is a noyous thyng"; this is to seyn:	For Jesus son of Sirach says that "music in weeping is an annoying thing"; this is to say:
as muche availleth to speken bifore folk to which his speche anoyeth	it as much avails to speak before folk whom his speech annoys
as it is to synge biforn hym that wepeth.	as it is to sing before him who weeps.
And whan this wise man saugh that hym wanted audience, al shamefast he sette hym doun agayn.	And when this wise man saw that he lacked an audience, all shame-fast he set himself down again.
For Salomon seith: "Ther as thou ne mayst have noon audience, enforce thee nat to speke."	For Solomon says: "Where thou can not have any audience, force thyself not to speak."
"I see wel," quod this wise man, "that the commune proverbe is sooth, that	"I see well," said this wise man, "that the common proverb is true, that
`good conseil wanteth whan it is moost nede.'"	`good advice is lacking when it is most needed.'"
Yet hadde this Melibeus in his conseil many folk that prively in his eere conseilled hym certeyn thyng,	Yet had this Melibeus among his advisors many folk that secretly in his ear advised him on certain matters,
and conseilled hym the contrarie in general audience.	and advised him the contrary in the hearing of all.
Whan Melibeus hadde herd that the gretteste partie of his conseil weren accorded that he sholde maken werre,	When Melibeus had heard that the greatest part of his advisors were agreed that he should make war,
anoon he consented to hir conseillyng and fully affermed hire sentence.	immediately he consented to their advice and fully affirmed their opinion.
Thanne dame Prudence, whan that she saugh how that hir housbonde shoop hym for to wreken hym on his	Then dame Prudence, when she saw how her husband prepared himself to avenge himself on his
foes and to bigynne werre, she in ful humble wise, whan she saugh hir tyme, seide to hym thise wordes:	foes and to begin war, she in very humble manner, when she saw her time, said to him these words:
"My lord," quod she, "I yow biseche, as hertely as I dar and kan,	"My lord," said she, "I beseech you, as heartily as I dare and can,
ne haste yow nat to faste and, for alle gerdons, as yeveth me audience.	do not hasten yourself too fast and, as you hope to prosper, give me a hearing.
For Piers Alfonce seith, `Whoso that dooth to thee oother good or harm, haste thee nat to quiten it,	For Petrus Alphonsus says, `Whoever does to thee either good or harm, hasten thee not to requite it,
for in this wise thy freend wole abyde and thyn enemy shal the lenger lyve in drede.'	for in this manner thy friend will abide and thine enemy shall the longer live in dread.'
The proverbe seith, `He hasteth wel that wisely kan abyde,' and `in wikked haste is no profit.'"	The proverb says, `He hastens well that wisely can abide,' and `in wicked haste is no benefit.'"
This Melibee answerde unto his wyf Prudence: "I purpose nat," quod he, "to werke by thy conseil,	This Melibee answered unto his wife Prudence: "I do not intend," said he, "to work according to thy advice,
for many causes and resouns. For certes, every wight wolde holde me thanne a fool;	for many causes and reasons. For certainly, every person would hold me then a fool;
this is to seyn, if I, for thy conseillyng, wolde chaungen	this is to say, if I, for thy advice, would change
thynges that been ordeyned and affermed by so manye wyse.	things that are ordained and affirmed by so many wise men.
Secoundely, I seye that alle wommen been wikke, and noon good of hem alle.	Secondly, I say that all women are wicked, and not one good of them all.
For `of a thousand men,' seith Salomon, `I foond o good man, but certes,	For `of a thousand men,' says Solomon, `I found one good man, but certainly,
of alle wommen, good womman foond I nevere.'	of all women, a good woman found I never.'
And also, certes, if I governed me by thy conseil,	And also, certainly, if I governed myself according to thy advice,
it sholde seme that I hadde yeve to thee over me the maistrie,	it should seem that I had given to thee the mastery over me,
and God forbede that it so weere!	and God forbid that it were so!
For Jhesus Syrak seith that `if the wyf have maistrie, she is contrarious to hir housbonde.'	For Jesus son of Sirach says that `if the wife have mastery, she is contrary to her husband.'
And Salomon seith: `Nevere in thy lyf to thy wyf, ne to thy child, ne to thy freend	And Solomon says: `Never in thy life to thy wife, nor to thy child, nor to thy friend
ne yeve no power over thyself, for bettre it were that thy children	give any power over thyself, for it would be better that thy children
aske of thy persone thynges that hem nedeth than thou see thyself	ask of thy person things that they need than that thou see thyself
in the handes of thy children.'	in the hands of thy children.'
And also if I wolde werke by thy conseillyng, certes, my conseil moste som tyme be secree,	And also if I would work according to thy advice, certainly, my counsel must some times be secret,
til it were tyme that it moste be knowe, and this ne may noght be.	until it were time that it must be known, and this may not be.
Whanne dame Prudence, ful debonairly and with greet pacience, hadde herd al that hir housbonde	When dame Prudence, very debonairly and with great patience, had heard all that her husband
 liked for to seye, thanne axed she of hym licence for to speke, and seyde in this wise:	was pleased to say, then she asked of him permission to speak, and said in this manner:
"My lord," quod she, "as to youre firste resoun, certes it may lightly been answered. For I seye that	"My lord," said she, "as to your first reason, certainly it may easily be answered. For I say that
it is no folie to chaunge conseil whan the thyng is chaunged,	it is no folly to change one's plans when the situation is changed,
or elles whan the thyng semeth ootherweyes than it was biforn.	or else when the matter seems other than it was before.
And mooreover, I seye that though ye han sworn and bihight to perfourne	And moreover, I say that though you have sworn and promised to accomplish
 youre emprise, and nathelees ye weyve	your undertaking, and nevertheless you abandon
to perfourne thilke same emprise by juste cause, men sholde nat seyn therfore that ye were a liere ne forsworn.	performing that same undertaking for a good reason, men should not say therefore that you are a liar nor forsworn.
For the book seith that `the wise man maketh no lesyng whan he turneth his corage to the bettre.'	For the book says that `the wise man tells no lie when he turns his inclination to the better.'
And al be it so that youre emprise be establissed and ordeyned by greet multitude of folk,	And although it be so that your undertaking is established and decided upon by a great multitude of folk,
yet thar ye nat accomplice thilke ordinaunce but yow like.	yet you need not carry out that plan unless you want to.
For the trouthe of thynges and the profit been rather founden in fewe folk that been wise and	For the truth of things and the benefit are rather found in few folk that are wise and
ful of resoun than by greet multitude of folk ther every man crieth and clatereth what that hym liketh.	full of reason than by a great multitude of folk where every man cries and babbles what he pleases.
Soothly swich multitude is nat honest.	Truly such a multitude is not honorable.
And as to the seconde resoun, where as ye seyn that alle wommen been wikke;	And as to the second reason, where you say that all women are wicked;
save youre grace, certes ye despisen alle wommen in this wyse, and	with all due respect to you, certainly you despise all women in this manner, and
`he that al despiseth, al displeseth,' as seith the book.	`he who despises all, displeases all,' as says the book.
And Senec seith that `whoso wole have sapience shal no man dispreyse,	And Seneca says that `whosoever will have wisdom shall no man disparage,
but he shal gladly techen the science that he kan withouten presumpcion or pride;	but he shall gladly teach the knowledge that he knows without presumption or pride;
and swiche thynges as he noght ne kan, he shal nat been ashamed to lerne hem,	and such things of which he knows nothing, he should not be ashamed to learn them,
and enquere of lasse folk than hymself.'	and ask for advice from lesser folk than himself.'
And, sire, that ther hath been many a good womman may lightly be preved.	And, sir, that there has been many a good woman may easily be proven.
For certes, sire, oure Lord Jhesu Crist wolde nevere have descended to be born of a womman,	For certainly, sir, our Lord Jesus Christ would never have condescended to be born of a woman,
if alle wommen hadden been wikke.	if all women had been wicked.
And after that, for the grete bountee that is in wommen,	And after that, for the great goodness that is in women,
oure Lord Jhesu Crist, whan he was risen fro deeth to lyve,	our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was risen from death to life,
appeered rather to a womman than to his Apostles.	appeared to a woman rather than to his Apostles.
And though that Salomon seith that he ne foond nevere womman good,	And though Solomon says that he never found a good woman,
it folweth nat therfore that alle wommen ben wikke.	it follows not therefore that all women are wicked.
For though that he ne foond no good womman, certes,	For though he found no good woman, certainly,
many another man hath founden many a womman ful good and trewe.	many another man has found many a woman very good and true.
Or elles, per aventure, the entente of Salomon was this:	Or else, possibly, the intent of Solomon was this:
that, as in sovereyn bounte, he foond no womman --	that, in supreme goodness, he found no woman --
this is to seyn, that ther is no wight that hath sovereyn bountee save God allone,	this is to say, that there is no creature who has supreme goodness save God alone,
as he hymself recordeth in hys Evaungelie.	as he himself records in his Gospels.
For ther nys no creature so good that hym ne wanteth	For there is no creature so good that he does not lack
somwhat of the perfeccioun of God, that is his makere.	something of the perfection of God, who is his maker.
Youre thridde reson is this: ye seyn that if ye governe yow by my conseil,	Your third reason is this: you say that if you govern yourself by my advice,
it sholde seme that ye hadde yeve me the maistrie and the lordshipe over youre persone.	it should seem that you had given me the mastery and the lordship over your person.
Sire, save youre grace, it is nat so. For if it so were that no man sholde be conseilled	Sir, with all due respect to you, it is not so. For if it were true that no man should be advised
but oonly of hem that hadden lordshipe and maistrie of his persone, men wolden nat be conseilled so ofte.	but only of them that had lordship and mastery of his person, men would not be advised so often.
For soothly thilke man that asketh conseil of a purpos, yet hath he free choys	For truly that man who asks advice about a plan, yet has free choice
wheither he wole werke by that conseil or noon.	whether he will follow by that advice or non.
And as to youre fourthe resoun, ther ye seyn that the janglerie of wommen kan hyde thynges that they	And as to your fourth reason, where you say that the gossip of women can hide things that they
wot noght, as who seith that a womman kan nat hyde that she woot;	know not, as who says that a woman can not hide what she knows;
sire, thise wordes been understonde of wommen that been jangleresses and wikked;	sir, these words are understood of women that are gossips and wicked;
of whiche wommen men seyn that thre thynges dryven a man out of his hous --	of which women men say that three things drive a man out of his house --
that is to seyn, smoke, droppyng of reyn, and wikked wyves;	that is to say, smoke, dropping of rain, and wicked wives;
and of swiche wommen seith Salomon that	and of such women says Solomon that
`it were bettre dwelle in desert than with a womman that is riotous.'	`it were better dwell in desert than with a woman that is dissolute.'
And sire, by youre leve, that am nat I,	And sir, by your leave, that am not I,
for ye han ful ofte assayed my grete silence and my grete pacience, and eek how wel that	for you have very often tested my great silence and my great patience, and also how well that
I kan hyde and hele thynges that men oghte secreely to hyde.	I can hide and conceal things that men ought secretly to hide.
And soothly, as to youre fifthe resoun, where as ye seyn that in wikked conseil wommen venquisshe men,	And truly, as to your fifth reason, where you say that in wicked advice women vanquish men,
God woot, thilke resoun stant heere in no stede.	God knows, that reason has no value here.
For understoond now, ye asken conseil to do wikkednesse;	For understand now, you ask advice to do wickedness;
and if ye wole werken wikkednesse, and youre wif restreyneth thilke wikked purpos,	and if you will do wickedness, and your wife restrains that wicked purpose,
and overcometh yow by reson and by good conseil,	and overcomes you by reason and by good advice,
certes youre wyf oghte rather to be preised than yblamed.	certainly your wife ought rather to be praised than blamed.
Thus sholde ye understonde the philosophre that seith, `In wikked conseil wommen venquisshen hir housbondes.'	Thus should you understand the philosopher that says, `In wicked advice women vanquish their husbands.'
And ther as ye blamen alle wommen and hir resouns, I shal shewe yow by manye ensamples that	And whereas you blame all women and their reasons, I shall show you by many examples that
many a womman hath ben ful good, and yet been, and hir conseils ful hoolsome and profitable.	many a woman has been very good, and yet are, and their advices very wholesome and beneficial.
Eek som men han seyd that the conseillynge of wommen	Also some men have said that the counsel of women
is outher to deere or elles to litel of pris.	is either too expensive or else too little of price.
But al be it so that ful many a womman is badde and hir conseil vile and noght worth,	But although it be so that very many a woman is bad and her advice vile and not worthy,
yet han men founde ful many a good womman, and ful discret and wis in conseillynge.	yet have men found very many a good woman, and very discrete and wise in giving counsel.
Loo, Jacob by good conseil of his mooder Rebekka wan the benysoun of Ysaak his fader	Lo, Jacob by the good advice of his mother Rebecca won the blessing of Isaac his fader
and the lordshipe over alle his bretheren.	and the lordship over all his brethren.
Judith by hire good conseil delivered the citee of Bethulie, in which she dwelled,	Judith by her good advice delivered the city of Bethulia, in which she dwelled,
out of the handes of Olofernus, that hadde it biseged and wolde have al destroyed it.	out of the hands of Holofernus, who had besieged it and would have entirely destroyed it.
Abygail delivered Nabal hir housbonde fro David the kyng, that wolde have slayn hym,	Abigail delivered Nabal her husband from David the king, who would have slain him,
and apaysed the ire of the kyng by hir wit and by hir good conseillyng.	and appeased the anger of the king by her wit and by her good advice.
Hester by hir good conseil enhaunced greetly the peple of God in the regne of Assuerus the kyng.	Hester by her good counsel advanced greatly the people of God in the reign of Assuerus the king.
And the same bountee in good conseillyng of many a good womman may men telle.	And the same goodness in good advising of many a good woman may men tell.
And mooreover, whan oure Lord hadde creat Adam, oure forme fader, he seyde in this wise:	And moreover, when our Lord had created Adam, our forefather, he said in this manner:
`It is nat good to been a man alloone; make we to hym an helpe semblable to hymself.'	`It is not good to be a man alone; let us make for him a helpmate similar to himself.'
Heere may ye se that if that wommen were nat goode, and hir conseils goode and profitable,	Here may you see that if women were not good, and their advice good and beneficial,
oure Lord God of hevene wolde nevere han wroght hem,	our Lord God of heaven would never have made them,
ne called hem help of man, but rather confusioun of man.	nor called them help of man, but rather confusion of man.
And ther seyde oones a clerk in two vers, `What is bettre than gold? Jaspre.	And there said once a clerk in two verses, `What is better than gold? Jasper.
What is bettre than jaspre? Wisedoom.	What is better than jasper? Wisdom.
And what is better than wisedoom? Womman. And what is bettre than a good womman? Nothyng.'	And what is better than wisdom? Woman. And what is better than a good woman? Nothing.'
And, sire, by manye of othre resons may ye seen that	And, sir, by many other reasons may you see that
manye wommen been goode, and hir conseils goode and profitable.	many women are good, and their advice good and beneficial.
And therfore, sire, if ye wol triste to my conseil, I shal restoore yow youre doghter hool and sound.	And therefore, sir, if you will trust to my advice, I shall restore you your daughter whole and sound.
And eek I wol do to yow so muche that ye shul have honour in this cause."	And also I will do for you so much that you shall have honor in this undertaking."
Whan Melibee hadde herd the wordes of his wyf Prudence, he seyde thus:	When Melibee had heard the words of his wife Prudence, he said thus:
"I se wel that the word of Salomon is sooth.	"I see well that the word of Solomon is sooth.
He seith that `wordes that been spoken discreetly by ordinaunce been honycombes,	He says that `words that are spoken discretely and properly are honeycombs,
for they yeven swetnesse to the soule and hoolsomnesse to the body.'	for they give sweetness to the soul and healthfulness to the body.'
And, wyf, by cause of thy sweete wordes, and eek for I have assayed and preved thy grete sapience	And, wife, because of thy sweet words, and also because I have tested and proven thy great wisdom
and thy grete trouthe, I wol governe me by thy conseil in alle thyng."	and thy great truth, I will govern myself by thy advice in all things."
"Now, sire," quod dame Prudence, "and syn ye vouche sauf to been governed by my conseil,	"Now, sir," said dame Prudence, "and since you consent to be governed by my advice,
I wol enforme yow how ye shul governe yourself in chesynge of youre conseillours.	I will inform you how you shall govern yourself in the choice of your advisors.
Ye shul first in alle youre werkes mekely biseken to the heighe God that he wol be youre conseillour;	You shall first in all your works meekly beseech the high God that he will be your advisor;
and shapeth yow to swich entente that he yeve yow conseil and confort, as taughte Thobie his sone:	and prepare yourself with the aim that he give you advice and comfort, as Tobias taught his son:
`At alle tymes thou shalt blesse God, and praye hym to dresse thy weyes,	`At all times thou shalt bless God, and pray him to prepare thy ways,
and looke that alle thy conseils been in hym for everemoore.'	and look that all thy counsels are in him for evermore.'
Seint Jame eek seith: `If any of yow have nede of sapience, axe it of God.'	Saint James also says: `If any of you have need of wisdom, ask it of God.'
And afterward thanne shul ye taken conseil in youreself,	And afterward then shall you take advice in yourself,
and examyne wel youre thoghtes of swich thyng as yow thynketh that is best for youre profit.	and examine well your thoughts of such thing as it seems to you best for your advantage.
And thanne shul ye dryve fro youre herte thre thynges that been contrariouse to good conseil;	And then shall you drive from your heart three things that are contrary to good advice;
that is to seyn, ire, coveitise, and hastifnesse.	that is to say, anger, greed, and haste.
"First, he that axeth conseil of hymself, certes he moste been withouten ire, for manye causes.	"First, he who asks advice of himself, certainly he must be without anger, for many reasons.
The firste is this: he that hath greet ire and wratthe in hymself, he weneth alwey that	The first is this: he who has great anger and wrath in himself, he supposes always that
he may do thyng that he may nat do.	he can do a thing that he can not do.
And secoundely, he that is irous and wrooth, he ne may nat wel deme;	And secondly, he who is angry and wrathful, he can not well judge;
and he that may nat wel deme, may nat wel conseille.	and he who can not well judge, can not well advise.
The thridde is this, that he that is irous and wrooth, as seith Senec,	The third is this, that he that is angry and wrathful, as says Seneca,
ne may nat speke but blameful thynges,	can not speak anything but blameworthy things,
and with his viciouse wordes he stireth oother folk to angre and to ire.	and with his vicious words he stirs other folk to anger and to ire.
And eek, sire, ye moste dryve coveitise out of youre herte.	And also, sir, you must drive greed out of your heart.
For the Apostle seith that coveitise is roote of alle harmes.	For the Apostle says that greed is root of all harms.
And trust wel that a coveitous man ne kan noght deme ne thynke,	And trust well that a greedy man can neither judge nor think anything,
but oonly to fulfille the ende of his coveitise;	except only to fulfill the object of his greed;
and certes, that ne may nevere been accompliced,	and certainly, that can never be accomplished,
for evere the moore habundaunce that he hath of richesse, the moore he desireth.	for always the more abundance that he has of riches, the more he desires.
And, sire, ye moste also dryve out of youre herte hastifnesse; for certes,	And, sir, you must also drive out of your heart haste; for certainly,
ye ne may nat deeme for the beste by a sodeyn thought that falleth in youre herte,	you can not judge for the best by a sudden thought that falls in your heart,
but ye moste avyse yow on it ful ofte.	but you must reflect upon it very often.
For, as ye herde her biforn, the commune proverbe is this, that `he that soone deemeth, soone repenteth.'	For, as you heard before this, the common proverb is this, that `he who soon judges, soon repents.'
Sire, ye ne be nat alwey in lyk disposicioun;	Sir, you are not always in the same frame of mind;
for certes, somthyng that somtyme semeth to yow that it is good for to do,	for certainly, something that sometimes seems to you that it is good to do,
another tyme it semeth to yow the contrarie.	another time it seems to you the contrary.
"Whan ye han taken conseil in youreself and han deemed by good deliberacion swich thyng as you semeth best,	"When you have pondered the matter and have judged by good deliberation such thing as seems best to you,
thanne rede I yow that ye kepe it secree.	then I advise you that you keep it secret.
Biwrey nat youre conseil to no persone, but if so be that ye wenen sikerly that	Reveal your plans to no person, but if it so be that you believe truly
thurgh youre biwreyyng youre condicioun shal be to yow the moore profitable.	through your revealing your condition shall be to you the more advantageous.
For Jhesus Syrak seith, `Neither to thy foo ne to thy frend discovere nat thy secree ne thy folie,	For Jesus son of Sirach says, `Neither to thy foe nor to thy friend discover not thy secret nor thy folly,
for they wol yeve yow audience and lookynge and supportacioun in thy presence and scorne thee in thyn absence.'	for they will give you audience and attention and support in thy presence and scorn thee in thine absence.'
Another clerk seith that `scarsly shaltou fynden any persone that may kepe conseil secrely.'	Another clerk says that `scarcely shalt thou find any person that can keep plans secretly.'
The book seith, `Whil that thou kepest thy conseil in thyn herte, thou kepest it in thy prisoun,	The book says, `While thou keepest thy plan in thine heart, thou keepest it in thy prison,
and whan thou biwreyest thy conseil to any wight, he holdeth thee in his snare.'	and when thou reveal thy plans to any person, he holds thee in his snare.'
And therfore yow is bettre to hyde youre conseil in youre herte than praye him	And therefore for you it is better to hide your plans in your heart than pray him
to whom ye han biwreyed youre conseil that he wole kepen it cloos and stille.	to whom you have revealed your plans that he will keep it close and still.
For Seneca seith: `If so be that thou ne mayst nat thyn owene conseil hyde,	For Seneca says: `If it so be that thou can not hide thine own plans,
how darstou prayen any oother wight thy conseil secrely to kepe?'	how dare thou pray any other person to keep thy advice secretly?'
But nathelees, if thou wene sikerly that the biwreiyng of thy conseil to a persone wol make	But nevertheless, if thou believe truly that the revealing of thy plans to a person will make
thy condicion to stonden in the bettre plyt, thanne shaltou tellen hym thy conseil in this wise.	thy condition stand in the better condition, then shalt thou tell him thy plans in this manner.
First thou shalt make no semblant wheither thee were levere pees or werre, or this or that,	First thou shalt make no outward sign whether thou would prefer peace or war, or this or that,
ne shewe hym nat thy wille and thyn entente.	nor show him not thy will and thine intent.
For trust wel that comunli thise conseillours been flatereres,	For trust well that commonly these advisors are flatterers,
namely the conseillours of grete lordes,	namely the advisors of great lords,
for they enforcen hem alwey rather to speken plesante wordes, enclynynge to the lordes lust,	for they force themselves always rather to speak pleasant words, inclining to the lord's desire,
than wordes that been trewe or profitable.	than words that are true or beneficial.
And therfore men seyn that the riche man hath seeld good conseil, but if he have it of hymself.	And therefore men say that the rich man has seldom good advice, unless he have it of himself.
And after that thou shalt considere thy freendes and thyne enemys.	And after that thou shalt consider thy friends and thine enemies.
And as touchynge thy freendes, thou shalt considere which of hem been	And as concerning thy friends, thou shalt consider which of them are
moost feithful and moost wise and eldest and most approved in conseillyng;	most faithful and most wise and eldest and most proven in giving advice;
and of hem shalt thou aske thy conseil, as the caas requireth.	and of them shalt thou ask thy advice, as the case requires.
I seye that first ye shul clepe to youre conseil youre freendes that been trewe.	I say that first you shall call to your council your friends that are true.
For Salomon seith that `right as the herte of a man deliteth in savour that is soote,	For Solomon says that `just as the heart of a man delights in taste that is sweet,
right so the conseil of trewe freendes yeveth swetnesse to the soule.'	just so the advice of true friends gives sweetness to the soul.'
He seith also, `Ther may no thyng be likned to the trewe freend,	He says also, `Nothing can be compared to a true friend,
for certes gold ne silver ben nat so muche worth as the goode wyl of a trewe freend.'	for certainly gold nor silver are not worth so much as the good will of a true friend.'
And eek he seith that `a trewe freend is a strong deffense; who so that it fyndeth,	And also he says that `a true friend is a strong defense; whoever finds it,
certes he fyndeth a greet tresour.'	certainly he finds a great treasure.'
Thanne shul ye eek considere if that youre trewe freendes been discrete and wise.	Then shall you also consider whether your true friends are discrete and wise.
For the book seith, `Axe alwey thy conseil of hem that been wise.'	For the book says, `Ask always thy advice of those who are wise.'
And by this same resoun shul ye clepen to youre conseil of youre freendes that been of age,	And by this same reason shall you call to your council some of your friends that are of suitably advanced age,
swiche as han seyn and been expert in manye thynges and been approved in conseillynges.	such as have seen and are expert in many things and are proven in giving advice.
For the book seith that `in olde men is the sapience, and in longe tyme the prudence.'	For the book says that `in old men is the wisdom, and in long time the prudence.
And Tullius seith that `grete thynges ne been nat ay accompliced by strengthe, ne by delivernesse of body, but	And Cicero says that `great things are not always accomplished by strength, nor by agility of body, but
by good conseil, by auctoritee of persones, and by science; the whiche thre thynges ne been nat fieble by age,	by good advice, by a person's power to persuade, and by knowledge; the which three things are not enfeebled by age,
but certes they enforcen and encreescen day by day.'	but certainly they gain strength and increase day by day.'
And thanne shul ye kepe this for a general reule: First shul ye clepen to youre conseil	And then shall you keep this for a general rule: First you shall call to your council
a fewe of youre freendes that been especiale;	a few of your friends who are particularly esteemed;
for Salomon seith, `Manye freendes have thou, but among a thousand chese thee oon to be thy conseillour.'	for Solomon says, `Many friends have thou, but among a thousand chose thyself one to be thy advisor.'
For al be it so that thou first ne telle thy conseil but to a fewe,	For although it be so that thou first tell thy advice only to a few,
thou mayst afterward telle it to mo folk if it be nede.	thou mayst afterward tell it to more folk if it be needed.
But looke alwey that thy conseillours have thilke thre condiciouns that I have seyd bifore --	But look always that thy advisors have those three conditions that I have said before --
that is to seyn, that they be trewe, wise, and of oold experience.	that is to say, that they are true, wise, and of old experience.
And werke nat alwey in every nede by oon counseillour allone;	And work not always in every need by one advisor alone;
for somtyme bihooveth it to been conseilled by manye.	for sometimes it is necessary to be advised by many.
For Salomon seith, `Salvacion of thynges is where as ther been manye conseillours.'	For Solomon says, `Salvation of things is where there are many advisors.'
"Now, sith that I have toold yow of which folk ye sholde been counseilled, now	"Now, since I have told you of which folk you should be advised, now
wol I teche yow which conseil ye oghte to eschewe.	I will teach you which advice you ought to shun.
First, ye shul eschue the conseillyng of fooles; for Salomon seith, `Taak no conseil of a fool,	First, you shall shun the advice of fools; for Solomon says, `Take no counsel of a fool,
for he ne kan noght conseille but after his owene lust and his affeccioun.'	for he can not advise except in accordance with his own desire and his inclination.'
The book seith that `the propretee of a fool is this: he troweth lightly harm of every wight,	The book says that `the characteristic of a fool is this: he easily believes harm of every person,
and lightly troweth alle bountee in hymself.'	and easily believes all goodness in himself.'
Thou shalt eek eschue the conseillyng of alle flatereres, swiche as enforcen hem rather to preise youre persone	Thou shalt also shun the advice of all flatterers, such as exert themselves rather to praise your person
by flaterye than for to telle yow the soothfastnesse of thynges.	by flattery than to tell you the truth of things.
Wherfore Tullius seith, `Amonges alle the pestilences that been in freendshipe the gretteste is flaterie.'	Wherefore Cicero says, `Amongst all the pestilences that are in friendship the greatest is flattery.'
And therfore is it moore nede that thou eschue and drede flatereres than any oother peple.	And therefore is it more needful that thou shun and dread flatterers than any other people.
The book seith, `Thou shalt rather drede and flee fro the sweete wordes of flaterynge preiseres	The book says, `Thou shalt rather dread and flee from the sweet words of flattering praisers
than fro the egre wordes of thy freend that seith thee thy sothes.'	than from the sharp words of thy friend who tells thee thy truths.'
Salomon seith that `the wordes of a flaterere is a snare to cacche with innocentz.'	Solomon says that `the words of a flatterer is a snare with which to catch innocents.'
He seith also that `he that speketh to his freend wordes of swetnesse and of plesaunce	He says also that `he who speaks to his friend words of sweetness and of pleasance
setteth a net biforn his feet to cacche hym.'	sets a net before his feet to catch him.'
And therfore seith Tullius, `Enclyne nat thyne eres to flatereres, ne taak no conseil of the wordes of flaterye.'	And therefore says Cicero, `Incline not thine ears to flatterers, and take no advice of the words of flattery.'
And Caton seith, `Avyse thee wel, and eschue the wordes of swetnesse and of plesaunce.'	And Cato says, `Ponder thee well, and shun the words of sweetness and of pleasance.'
And eek thou shalt eschue the conseillyng of thyne olde enemys that been reconsiled.	And also thou shalt shun the advice of thine old enemies that are reconciled.
The book seith that `no wight retourneth saufly into the grace of his olde enemy.'	The book says that `no person returns safely into the good will of his old enemy.'
And Isope seith, `Ne trust nat to hem to whiche thou hast had som tyme werre or enemytee,	And Aesop says, `Trust not to those with whom thou hast had at some time war or enmity,
ne telle hem nat thy conseil.'	nor tell them not thy plans.'
And Seneca telleth the cause why: `It may nat be,' seith he, `that where greet	And Seneca tells the reason why: `It may not be,' says he, `that where great
fyr hath longe tyme endured, that ther ne dwelleth som vapour of warmnesse.'	fire has long time endured, but that there dwells some vapor of warmness.'
And therfore seith Salomon, `In thyn olde foo trust nevere.'	And therefore says Solomon, `In thine old foe trust never.'
For sikerly, though thyn enemy be reconsiled, and maketh thee chiere of humylitee,	For surely, though thine enemy be reconciled, and makes thee the appearance of humility,
and lowteth to thee with his heed, ne trust hym nevere.	and bows to thee with his head, trust him never.
For certes he maketh thilke feyned humilitee moore for his profit than for any love of thy persone,	For certainly he makes that feigned humility more for his advantage than for any love of thy person,
by cause that he deemeth to have victorie over thy persone by swich feyned contenance,	because he supposes to have victory over thy person by such feigned behavior,
the which victorie he myghte nat have by strif or werre.	the which victory he might not have by strife or war.
And Peter Alfonce seith, `Make no felawshipe with thyne olde enemys, for if thou do hem bountee,	And Petrus Alphnsus says, `Make no fellowship with thine old enemies, for if thou do them goodness,
they wol perverten it into wikkednesse.'	they will pervert it into wickedness.'
And eek thou most eschue the conseillyng of hem that been thy servantz and beren thee greet reverence,	And also thou most shun the advice of those who are thy servants and bear thee great reverence,
for peraventure they seyn it moore for drede than for love.	for perhaps they say it more for dread than for love.
And therfore seith a philosophre in this wise:	And therefore says a philosopher in this manner:
`Ther is no wight parfitly trewe to hym that he to soore dredeth.'	`There is no person perfectly true to him whom he too sorely dreads.'
And Tullius seith, `Ther nys no myght so greet of any emperour that longe may endure,	And Cicero says, `There is no might so great of any emperor that long may endure,
but if he have moore love of the peple than drede.'	unless he has more love of the people than dread.'
Thou shalt also eschue the conseiling of folk that been dronkelewe, for they ne kan no conseil hyde.	Thou shalt also shun the advice of folk that are drunkards, for they nor can hide no plans.
For Salomon seith, `Ther is no privetee ther as regneth dronkenesse.'	For Solomon says, `There is no secrecy where drunkenness reigns.'
Ye shul also han in suspect the conseillyng of swich folk as	You shall also be suspicious of the advice of such folk as
conseille yow o thyng prively and conseille yow the contrarie openly.	advise you one thing privately and counsel you the contrary openly.
For Cassidorie seith that `it is a manere sleighte to hyndre,	For Cassiodorus says that `it is a difficult task to hinder a scheme,
whan he sheweth to doon o thyng openly and werketh prively the contrarie.'	when a person appears to do one thing openly and secretly works the contrary.'
Thou shalt also have in suspect the conseillyng of wikked folk. For the book seith,	Thou shalt also be suspicious of the advice of wicked folk. For the book says,
`The conseillyng of wikked folk is alwey ful of fraude.'	`The advice of wicked folk is always full of fraud.'
And David seith, `Blisful is that man that hath nat folwed the conseilyng of shrewes.'	And David says, `Blissful is that man who has not followed the advice of scoundrels.'
Thou shalt also eschue the conseillyng of yong folk, for hir conseil is nat rype.	Thou shalt also shun the advice of young folk, for their counsel is not ripe.
"Now, sire, sith I have shewed yow of which folk ye shul take youre conseil	"Now, sir, since I have showed you of which folk you shall take your advice
and of which folk ye shul folwe the conseil,	and of which folk you shall follow the advice,
now wol I teche yow how ye shal examyne youre conseil, after the doctrine of Tullius.	now will I teach you how you shall examine your advice, according to the doctrine of Cicero.
In the examynynge thanne of youre conseillour ye shul considere manye thynges.	In the examining then of your advisor you shall consider many things .
Alderfirst thou shalt considere that in thilke thyng that thou purposest, and upon what thyng thou wolt have conseil,	First of all thou shalt consider that in that thing that thou intendest, and upon which thing thou will have advice,
that verray trouthe be seyd and conserved; this is to seyn, telle trewely thy tale.	that real truth be said and preserved; this is to say, tell truly thy tale.
For he that seith fals may nat wel be conseilled in that cas of which he lieth.	For he that speaks falsely may not well be advised in that case of which he lies.
And after this thou shalt considere the thynges that acorden to that thou purposest	And after this thou shalt consider the things that agree with that thou intendest
for to do by thy conseillours, if resoun accorde therto,	for to act as thy advisors advise, if reason accord thereto,
and eek if thy myght may atteine therto, and if the moore part	and also if thy might can attain thereto, and if the larger part
and the bettre part of thy conseillours acorde therto, or noon.	and the better part of thy advisors accord thereto, or not.
Thanne shaltou considere what thyng shal folwe of that conseillyng,	Then shalt thou consider what thing shall follow from that advice,
as hate, pees, werre, grace, profit, or damage, and manye othere thynges.	as hate, peace, war, grace, profit, or damage, and many other things.
And in alle thise thynges thou shalt chese the beste and weyve alle othere thynges.	And in all these things thou shalt chose the best and abandon all other things .
Thanne shaltow considere of what roote is engendred the matiere of thy conseil	Then shalt thou consider of what root is engendered the matter of thy advice
and what fruyt it may conceyve and engendre.	and what fruit it may conceive and engender.
Thou shalt eek considere alle thise causes, fro whennes they been sprongen.	Thou shalt also consider all these causes, from whence they are sprung.
And whan ye han examyned youre conseil, as I have seyd, and which partie is the bettre	And when you have examined your advice, as I have said, and (decided) which part is the better
and moore profitable, and han approved it by manye wise folk and olde,	and more beneficial, and have tested it by many wise and old folk,
thanne shaltou considere if thou mayst parfourne it and maken of it a good ende.	then shalt thou consider if thou can perform it and make of it a good end.
For certes resoun wol nat that any man sholde bigynne a thyng	For certainly reason will not desire that any man should begin a thing
but if he myghte parfourne it as hym oghte;	unless he might perform it as he ought to;
ne no wight sholde take upon hym so hevy a charge that he myghte nat bere it.	nor no person should take upon him so heavy a charge that he might not bear it.
For the proverbe seith, `He that to muche embraceth, distreyneth litel.'	For the proverb says, `He who too much embraces, keeps little.'
And Catoun seith, `Assay to do swich thyng as thou hast power to doon,	And Cato says, `Try to do such thing as thou hast power to do,
lest that the charge oppresse thee so soore that	lest that the charge oppress thee so sorely that
thee bihoveth to weyve thyng that thou hast bigonne.'	thou art compelled to abandon an undertaking that thou hast begun.'
And if so be that thou be in doute wheither thou mayst parfourne a thing or noon,	And if it so be that thou art in doubt about whether thou can perform a thing or not,
chese rather to suffre than bigynne.	choose rather to suffer than begin.
And Piers Alphonce seith, `If thou hast myght to doon a thyng of which thou most repente,	And Petrus Alphonsus says, `If thou hast might to do a thing of which thou must repent,
it is bettre "nay" than "ye."'	it is better "nay" than "yea."'
This is to seyn, that thee is bettre holde thy tonge stille than for to speke.	This is to say, that for thee it is better hold thy tongue still than to speak.
Thanne may ye understonde by strenger resons that if thou hast power to parfourne a werk	Then may you understand by stronger reasons that if thou hast power to perform a work
of which thou shalt repente, thanne is it bettre that thou suffre than bigynne.	of which thou shalt repent, then is it better that thou suffer than begin.
Wel seyn they that defenden every wight to assaye a thyng of which he is in doute	Well say they who forbid every person to attempt a thing of which he is in doubt
wheither he may parfourne it or noon.	whether he can perform it or not.
And after, whan ye han examyned youre conseil, as I have seyd biforn, and knowen wel that	And after, when you have examined your advice, as I have said before, and know well that
ye may parfourne youre emprise, conferme it thanne sadly til it be at an ende.	you can perform your enterprise, prosecute it then diligently until it be at an end.
"Now is it resoun and tyme that I shewe yow whanne and wherfore that	"Now is it reasonable and time that I show you when and wherefore that
ye may chaunge youre counseil withouten youre repreve.	you may change your plans without earning dishonor.
Soothly, a man may chaungen his purpos and his conseil if the cause cesseth,	Truly, a man may change his purpose and his plans if the cause ceases,
or whan a newe caas bitydeth.	or when a new case befalls.
For the lawe seith that `upon thynges that newely bityden bihoveth newe conseil.'	For the law says that `things that newly befall require new plans.'
And Senec seith, `If thy conseil is comen to the eeris of thyn enemy, chaunge thy conseil.'	And Seneca says, `If thy plan is come to the ears of thine enemy, change thy plan.'
Thou mayst also chaunge thy conseil if so be that thou fynde that by errour,	Thou mayst also change thy plan if it so be that thou find that by error,
or by oother cause, harm or damage may bityde.	or by other cause, harm or damage may befall.
Also if thy conseil be dishonest, or ellis cometh of dishonest cause, chaunge thy conseil.	Also if thy plan be unjust, or else comes of dishonest cause, change thy plan.
For the lawes seyn that `alle bihestes that been dishoneste been of no value';	For the laws say that `all promises that are dishonest are of no value';
and eek if so be that it be inpossible, or may nat goodly be parfourned or kept.	and also if it so be that it is impossible, or can not goodly be performed or kept.
"And take this for a general reule, that every conseil that is affermed so strongly that it may nat	"And take this for a general rule, that every plan that is affirmed so strongly that it may not
be chaunged for no condicioun that may bityde, I seye that thilke conseil is wikked."	be changed for any condition that may befall, I say that that plan is wicked."
This Melibeus, whanne he hadde herd the doctrine of his wyf dame Prudence, answerde in this wyse:	This Melibeus, when he had heard the doctrine of his wife dame Prudence, answered in this wise:
"Dame," quod he, "as yet into this tyme ye han wel and covenably taught me as in general how	"Dame," said he, "as yet until this time you have well and fittingly taught me as in general how
I shal governe me in the chesynge and in the withholdynge of my conseillours.	I should govern myself in the choice and in the retention of my advisors.
But now wolde I fayn that ye wolde condescende in especial	But now would I eagerly desire that you would get down to particulars
and telle me how liketh yow, or what semeth yow, by oure conseillours	and tell me how you like it, or what it seems to you, concerning our advisors
that we han chosen in oure present nede."	that we have chosen in our present need."
"My lord," quod she, "I biseke yow in al humblesse that ye wol nat wilfully replie agayn my resouns,	"My lord," said she, "I beseech you in all humility that you will not willfully reply against my arguments,
ne distempre youre herte, thogh I speke thyng that yow displese.	nor upset your heart, though I speak something that may displease you.
For God woot that, as in myn entente, I speke it for youre beste,	For God knows that, in my intent, I speak it for your best,
for youre honour, and for youre profite eke.	for your honor, and for your benefit also.
And soothly, I hope that youre benyngnytee wol taken it in pacience.	And truly, I hope that your benignity will take it in patience.
Trusteth me wel," quod she, "that youre conseil as in this caas ne sholde nat, as to speke properly,	Trust me well," said she, "that your advice in this case should not, to speak properly,
be called a conseillyng, but a mocioun or a moevyng of folye,	be called an advising, but a motion or a moving of folly,
in which conseil ye han erred in many a sondry wise.	in which advice you have erred in many a different way.
"First and forward, ye han erred in th' assemblynge of youre conseillours.	"First of all, you have erred in the assembling of your advisors.
For ye sholde first have cleped a fewe folk to youre conseil, and after ye myghte han shewed it	For you should first have called a few folk to your council, and after you might have showed it
to mo folk, if it hadde been nede.	to more folk, if it had been necessary.
But certes, ye han sodeynly cleped to youre conseil a greet multitude of peple,	But certainly, you have suddenly called to your council a great multitude of people,
ful chargeant and ful anoyous for to heere.	very burdensome and very annoying to hear.
Also ye han erred, for theras ye sholden oonly have cleped to youre conseil	Also you have erred, for whereas you should only have called to your council
youre trewe frendes olde and wise,	your true friends old and wise,
ye han ycleped straunge folk, yonge folk, false flatereres, and enemys reconsiled,	you have called foreign folk, young folk, false flatterers, and enemies reconciled,
and folk that doon yow reverence withouten love.	and folk who do you reverence without love.
And eek also ye have erred, for ye han broght with yow to youre conseil ire, coveitise, and hastifnesse,	And also you have erred, for you have brought with you to your council anger, greed, and haste,
the whiche thre thinges been contrariouse to every conseil honest and profitable;	the which three things are contrary to every council honorable and beneficial;
the whiche thre thinges ye han nat anientissed or destroyed hem,	the which three things you have not annihilated or destroyed them,
neither in youreself, ne in youre conseillours, as yow oghte.	neither in yourself, nor in your advisors, as you ought.
Ye han erred also, for ye han shewed to youre conseillours	You have erred also, for you have shown to your advisors
youre talent and youre affeccioun to make werre anon and for to do vengeance.	your desire and your inclination to make war immediately and to do vengeance.
They han espied by youre wordes to what thyng ye been enclyned;	They have espied by your words to what thing you are inclined;
and therfore han they rather conseilled yow to youre talent than to youre profit.	and therefore have they advised you rather to your inclination than to your advantage.
Ye han erred also, for it semeth that yow suffiseth	You have erred also, for it seems that to you it suffices
to han been conseilled by thise conseillours oonly, and with litel avys,	to have been advised by these counselors only, and with little consultation,
whereas in so greet and so heigh a nede it hadde been necessarie mo conseillours	whereas in so great and so urgent a situation it had been necessary to have more advisors
and moore deliberacion to parfourne youre emprise.	and more deliberation to perform your undertaking.
Ye han erred also, for ye ne han nat examyned youre conseil in the forseyde manere,	You have erred also, for you have not examined your advice in the foresaid manner,
ne in due manere, as the caas requireth.	nor in suitable manner, as the case requires.
Ye han erred also, for ye han maked no division bitwixe youre conseillours -- this is to seyn,	You have erred also, for you have made no division between your advisors -- this is to say,
bitwixen youre trewe freendes and youre feyned conseillours --	between your true friends and your feigned advisors --
ne ye han nat knowe the wil of youre trewe freendes olde and wise,	and you have not known the will of your true friends old and wise,
but ye han cast alle hire wordes in an hochepot, and enclyned youre herte to the moore part	but you have cast all their words in an hodgepodge, and inclined your heart to the larger part
and to the gretter nombre, and there been ye condescended.	and to the greater number, and to that you are yielded.
And sith ye woot wel that men shal alwey fynde a gretter nombre of fooles than of wise men,	And since you know well that men shall always find a greater number of fools than of wise men,
and therfore the conseils that been at congregaciouns and multitudes of folk, there as men take moore reward	and therefore the counsels that are at gatherings and multitudes of folk, where men pay more attention
to the nombre than to the sapience of persones,	to the number than to the wisdom of persons,
ye se wel that in swiche conseillynges fooles han the maistrie."	you see well that in such councils fools have the mastery."
Melibeus answerde agayn, and seyde, "I graunte wel that I have erred;	Melibeus answered again, and said, "I grant well that I have erred;
but there as thou hast toold me heerbiforn	but whereas thou hast told me before now
that he nys nat to blame that chaungeth his conseillours in certein caas and for certeine juste causes,	that he is not to blame who changes his advisors in certain cases and for certain just causes,
I am al redy to chaunge my conseillours right as thow wolt devyse.	I am all ready to change my advisors just as thou will devise.
The proverbe seith that `for to do synne is mannyssh,	The proverb says that `to do sin is human,
but certes for to persevere longe in synne is werk of the devel.'"	but certainly to persevere long in sin is work of the devil.'"
To this sentence answered anon dame Prudence, and seyde,	To this sentence answered immediately dame Prudence, and said,
"Examineth," quod she, "youre conseil, and lat us see	"Examine," said she, "your counsel, and let us see
the whiche of hem han spoken most resonably and taught yow best conseil.	the which of them have spoken most reasonably and taught you best advice.
And for as muche as that the examynacion is necessarie, lat us bigynne at the surgiens	And forasmuch as the examination is necessary, let us begin at the surgeons
and at the phisiciens, that first speeken in this matiere.	and at the physicians, who first spoke in this matter.
I sey yow that the surgiens and phisiciens han seyd yow in youre conseil discreetly, as hem oughte,	I tell you that the surgeons and physicians have spoken to you in counselling you discretely, as they ought,
and in hir speche seyden ful wisely that to the office of hem aperteneth to doon to every wight	and in their speech said very wisely that to their office it pertains to do to every person
honour and profit, and no wight for to anoye,	honor and profit, and no person to harm,
and after hir craft to doon greet diligence	and in accordance with their craft to do great diligence
unto the cure of hem which that they han in hir governaunce.	unto the care of those that they have in their governance.
And, sire, right as they han answered wisely and discreetly,	And, sir, just as they have answered wisely and discretely,
right so rede I that they been heighly and sovereynly gerdoned for hir noble speche,	just so I deduce that they are highly and chiefly rewarded for their noble speech,
and eek for they sholde do the moore ententif bisynesse in the curacion of youre doghter deere.	and also for they should do the more diligent effort in the care of your dear daughter.
For al be it so that they been youre freendes, therfore shal ye nat suffren	For although it be so that they are your friends, therefore shall you not allow
that they serve yow for noght,	that they serve you for naught,
but ye oghte the rather gerdone hem and shewe hem youre largesse.	but you ought the rather to reward them and show them your generosity.
And as touchynge the proposicioun which that the phisiciens encreesceden in this caas -- this is to seyn,	And as touching the theory that the physicians developed in this case -- this is to say,
that in maladies that oon contrarie is warisshed by another contrarie --	that in maladies that one contrary is cured by another contrary --
I wolde fayn knowe hou ye understonde thilke text, and what is youre sentence."	I would be eager to know how you understand that text, and what is your interpretation."
"Certes," quod Melibeus, "I understonde it in this wise:	"Certainly," said Melibeus, "I understand it in this way:
that right as they han doon me a contrarie, right so sholde I doon hem another.	that just as they have done me a contrary, right so should I do them another.
For right as they han venged hem on me and doon me wrong,	For just as they have avenged themselves on me and done me wrong,
right so shal I venge me upon hem and doon hem wrong;	just so shall I avenge myself upon them and do them wrong;
and thanne have I cured oon contrarie by another."	and then have I cured one contrary by another."
"Lo, lo," quod dame Prudence, "how lightly is every man enclined to his owene desir	"Lo, lo," said dame Prudence, "how easily is every man inclined to his own desire
and to his owene plesaunce!	and to his own pleasure!
Certes," quod she, "the wordes of the phisiciens ne sholde nat han been understonden in thys wise.	Certainly," said she, "the words of the physicians should not have been understood in this way.
For certes, wikkednesse is nat contrarie to wikkednesse, ne vengeance to vengeaunce,	For certainly, wickedness is not contrary to wickedness, nor vengeance to vengeance,
ne wrong to wrong, but they been semblable.	nor wrong to wrong, but they are similar.
And therfore o vengeaunce is nat warisshed by another vengeaunce, ne o wroong by another wroong,	And therefore one vengeance is not cured by another vengeance, nor one wrong by another wrong,
but everich of hem encreesceth and aggreggeth oother.	but each of them increases and aggravates the other.
But certes, the wordes of the phisiciens sholde been understonden in this wise:	But certainly, the words of the physicians should be understood in this way:
for good and wikkednesse been two contraries, and pees and werre, vengeaunce	for good and wickedness are two contraries, and peace and war, vengeance
and suffraunce, discord and accord, and manye othere thynges;	and forbearance, discord and accord, and many other things ;
but certes, wikkednesse shal be warisshed by goodnesse, discord by accord, werre by pees,	but certainly, wickedness must be cured by goodness, discord by accord, war by peace,
and so forth of othere thynges.	and so forth of other things .
And heerto accordeth Seint Paul the Apostle in manye places.	And to this Saint Paul the Apostle agrees in many places.
He seith, `Ne yeldeth nat harm for harm, ne wikked speche for wikked speche,	He says, `Yield not harm for harm, nor wicked speech for wicked speech,
but do wel to hym that dooth thee harm and blesse hym that seith to thee harm.'	but do well to him that does thee harm and bless him that says to thee harm.'
And in manye othere places he amonesteth pees and accord.	And in many other places he recommends peace and accord.
But now wol I speke to yow of the conseil which that was yeven to yow	But now will I speak to you of the advice which was given to you
by the men of lawe and the wise folk,	by the men of law and the wise folk,
that seyden alle by oon accord, as ye han herd bifore,	who said all by unanimous agreement, as you have heard before,
that over alle thynges ye shal doon youre diligence to kepen youre persone and to warnestoore youre hous;	that over all things you shall do your best effort to guard your person and to garrison your house;
and seyden also that in this caas yow oghten for to werken ful avysely and with greet deliberacioun.	and said also that in this case you ought to work very advisedly and with great deliberation.
And, sire, as to the firste point, that toucheth to the kepyng of youre persone,	And, sir, as to the first point, that touches on the keeping of your person,
ye shul understonde that he that hath werre shal everemoore mekely and devoutly preyen, biforn alle thynges,	you shall understand that he who has war shall evermore meekly and devoutly pray, before all things,
that Jhesus Crist of his mercy wol han hym in his proteccion	that Jesus Christ of his mercy will have him in his protection
and been his sovereyn helpyng at his nede.	and be his best help at his need.
For certes, in this world ther is no wight that may be conseilled ne kept sufficeantly	For certainly, in this world there is no person that can be advised nor guarded sufficiently
withouten the kepyng of oure Lord Jhesu Crist.	without the protection of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To this sentence accordeth the prophete David, that seith,	To this opinion agrees the prophet David, who says,
`If God ne kepe the citee, in ydel waketh he that it kepeth.'	`If God does not guard the city, in vain watches he who guards it.'
Now, sire, thanne shul ye committe the kepyng of youre persone	Now, sir, then shall you commit the guarding of your person
to youre trewe freendes that been approved and yknowe,	to your true friends that are proven and known,
and of hem shul ye axen help youre persone for to kepe. For Catoun seith,	and of them shall you ask help to guard your person. For Cato says,
`If thou hast nede of help, axe it of thy freendes,	`If thou hast need of help, ask it of thy friends,
for ther nys noon so good a phisicien as thy trewe freend.'	for there is no physician so good as thy true friend.'
And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow fro alle straunge folk, and fro lyeres,	And after this then shall you keep yourself from all unfamiliar folk, and from liars,
and have alwey in suspect hire compaignye.	and be always suspicious of their company.
For Piers Alfonce seith, `Ne taak no compaignye by the weye of a straunge man,	For Petrus Alphonsus says, `take no company by the way of a strange man,
but if so be that thou have knowe hym of a lenger tyme.	but if it so be that thou have known him of a longer time.
And if so be that he falle into thy compaignye paraventure, withouten thyn assent,	And if it so be that he fall into thy company by chance, without thine assent,
enquere thanne as subtilly as thou mayst of his conversacion, and of his lyf bifore, and feyne thy wey;	inquire then as subtly as thou can of his way of life, and of his life before, and feign thy way;
seye that [thou] wolt thider as thou wolt nat go;	say that [thou] wolt thither as thou will not go;
and if he bereth a spere, hoold thee on the right syde,	and if he bears a spear, hold thyself on the right side,
and if he bere a swerd, hoold thee on the lift syde.'	and if he bear a sword, hold thyself on the left side.'
And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow wisely from all swich manere peple as I have seyd bifore,	And after this then shall you keep yourself wisely from all such manner people as I have said before,
and hem and hir conseil eschewe.	and them and their advice shun.
And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow in swich manere	And after this then shall you keep yourself in such manner
that, for any presumpcion of youre strengthe, that ye ne dispise nat, ne accompte nat the myght	that, for any confidence in your strength, that you nor despise not, nor account not the might
of youre adversarie so litel that ye lete the kepyng of youre persone for youre presumpcioun,	of your adversary so little that you neglect the protection of your person because of your over-confidence,
for every wys man dredeth his enemy.	for every wise man dreads his enemy.
And Salomon seith, `Weleful is he that of alle hath drede,	And Solomon says, `Happy is he who of all has dread,
for certes, he that thurgh the hardynesse of his herte and thurgh the hardynesse of hymself hath	for certainly, he who through the hardiness of his heart and through the hardiness of himself has
to greet presumpcioun, hym shal yvel bityde.'	too great self-confidence, to him shall evil befall.'
Thanne shul ye everemoore contrewayte embusshementz and alle espiaille.	Then shall you evermore watch out for ambushes and all espionage,
For Senec seith that `the wise man that dredeth harmes, eschueth harmes,	For Seneca says that `the wise man who dreads harms, shuns harms,
ne he ne falleth into perils that perils eschueth.'	nor does he who shuns perils fall into perils.'
And al be it so that it seme that thou art in siker place,	And although it be so that it seems that thou art in a safe place,
yet shaltow alwey do thy diligence in kepynge of thy persone;	yet shalt thou always do thy best efforts in guarding of thy person;
this is to seyn, ne be nat necligent to kepe thy persone	this is to say, be not negligent to guard thy person
nat oonly fro thy gretteste enemys but fro thy leeste enemy.	not only from thy greatest enemies but from thy least enemy.
Senek seith, `A man that is well avysed, he dredeth his leste enemy.'	Seneca says, `A man that is well advised, he dreads his least enemy.'
Ovyde seith that `the litel wesele wol slee the grete bole and the wilde hert.'	Ovid says that `the little weasel will slay the great bull and the wild hart.'
And the book seith, `A litel thorn may prikke a kyng ful soore,	And the book says, `A little thorn may prick a king very sorely,
and an hound wol holde the wilde boor.'	and a hound will bring to bay the wild boar.'
But nathelees, I sey nat thou shalt be so coward that thou doute ther wher as is no drede.	But nevertheless, I say not thou should be so cowardly that thou fear where there is no reason for dread.
The book seith that `somme folk han greet lust to deceyve, but yet they dreden hem to be deceyved.'	The book says that `some folk have great desire to deceive, but yet they dread themselves to be deceived.'
Yet shaltou drede to been empoisoned and kepe the from the compaignye of scorneres.	Yet thou should dread to be poisoned and keep thyself from the company of scoffers.
For the book seith, `With scorneres make no compaignye, but flee hire wordes as venym.'	For the book says, `With scorners make no company, but flee their words as venom.'
"Now, as to the seconde point,	"Now, as to the second point,
where as youre wise conseillours conseilled yow to warnestoore youre hous with gret diligence,	whereas your wise advisors counseled you to fortify your house with great diligence,
I wolde fayn knowe how that ye understonde thilke wordes and what is youre sentence."	I would be eager to know how you understand those words and what is your decision."
Melibeus answerde and seyde, "Certes, I understande it in this wise: That I shal warnestoore myn hous with toures,	Melibeus answered and said, "Certainly, I understand it in this way: That I should fortify my house with towers,
swiche as han castelles and othere manere edifices, and armure, and artelries,	such as have castles and other sorts of edifices, and armor, and artillery,
by whiche thynges I may my persone and myn hous so kepen and deffenden	by which things I can my person and my house so guard and defend
that myne enemys shul been in drede myn hous for to approche."	that my enemies shall be in dread to approach my house."
To this sentence answerde anon Prudence: "Warnestooryng," quod she,	To this sentence answered immediately Prudence: "Fortifying," said she,
"of heighe toures and of grete edifices apperteyneth somtyme to pryde.	"of high towers and of great edifices pertains sometimes to pride.
And eek men make heighe toures, [and grete edifices] with grete costages and with greet travaille,	And also men make high towers, [and great edifices] with great expenditures and with great travail,
and whan that they been accompliced, yet be they nat worth a stree,	and when that they are accomplished, yet are they not worth a straw,
but if they be defended by trewe freendes that been olde and wise.	unless they are defended by true friends that are old and wise.
And understoond wel that the gretteste and strongeste garnysoun that a riche man may have,	And understand well that the greatest and strongest garrison that a rich man may have,
as wel to kepen his persone as his goodes, is	as well to keep his person as his goods, is
that he be biloved with hys subgetz and with his neighebores.	that he is beloved by his subjects and by his neighbors.
For thus seith Tullius, that `ther is a manere garnysoun	For thus says Cicero, that `there is a sort of garrison
that no man may venquysse ne disconfite, and that is	that no man can vanquish nor discomfit, and that is
a lord to be biloved of his citezeins and of his peple.'	for a lord to be beloved by his citizens and by his people.'
Now, sire, as to the thridde point, where as youre olde	Now, sir, as to the third point, whereas your old
and wise conseillours seyden that yow ne oghte nat sodeynly ne hastily proceden in this nede,	and wise advisors said that you ought not suddenly nor hastily proceed in this urgent matter,
but that yow oghte purveyen and apparaillen yow in this caas with greet diligence and greet deliberacioun;	but that you ought to prepare yourself and get ready in this case with great diligence and great deliberation;
trewely, I trowe that they seyden right wisely and right sooth.	truly, I believe that they spoke very wisely and real truth.
For Tullius seith, `In every nede, er thou bigynne it, apparaille thee with greet diligence.'	For Cicero says, `In every urgent matter, ere thou begin it, prepare thyself with great diligence.'
Thanne seye I that in vengeance-takyng, in werre, in bataille, and in warnestooryng,	Then say I that in vengeance-taking, in war, in battle, and in fortification,
er thow bigynne, I rede that thou apparaille thee therto, and do it with greet deliberacion.	ere thou begin, I advise that thou prepare thyself for that, and do it with great deliberation.
For Tullius seith that `longe apparaillyng biforn the bataille maketh short victorie.'	For Cicero says that `long preparation before the battle makes short victory.'
And Cassidorus seith, `The garnysoun is stronger whan it is longe tyme avysed.'	And Cassiodorus says, `The protection is stronger when it is long time considered.'
But now lat us speken of the conseil that was accorded by youre neighebores,	But now let us speak of the advice that was agreed upon by your neighbors,
swiche as doon yow reverence withouten love,	such as do you reverence without love,
youre olde enemys reconsiled, youre flatereres,	your old enemies reconciled, your flatterers,
that conseilled yow certeyne thynges prively, and openly conseilleden yow the contrarie;	that advised you certain things secretly, and openly counseled you the contrary;
the yonge folk also, that conseilleden yow to venge yow and make werre anon.	the young folk also, who advised you to avenge yourself and make war immediately.
And certes, sire, as I have seyd biforn, ye han greetly erred	And certainly, sir, as I have said before, you have greatly erred
to han cleped swich manere folk to youre conseil,	to have called such sort of folk to your council,
which conseillours been ynogh repreved by the resouns aforeseyd.	which advisors are enough reproved by the reasons spoken earlier.
But nathelees, lat us now descende to the special. Ye shuln first procede after the doctrine of Tullius.	But nevertheless, let us now descend to the particular details. You should first proceed according to the doctrine of Cicero.
Certes, the trouthe of this matiere, or of this conseil, nedeth nat diligently enquere,	Certainly, the truth of this matter, or of this advice, we need not diligently inquire,
for it is wel wist whiche they been that han doon to yow this trespas and vileynye,	for it is well known who they are that have done to you this trespass and villainy,
and how manye trespassours, and in what manere	and how many trespassers, and in what manner
they han to yow doon al this wrong and al this vileynye.	they have done to you all this wrong and all this villainy.
And after this, thanne shul ye examyne the seconde condicion which that the same Tullius addeth in this matiere.	And after this, then you should examine the second condition which the same Cicero adds in this matter.
For Tullius put a thyng which that he clepeth `consentynge'; this is to seyn,	For Cicero hypothesized a thing which he calls `consenting'; this is to say,
who been they, and whiche been they and how manye that consenten to thy conseil	who are they, and which are they and how many that consent to thy advice
in thy wilfulnesse to doon hastif vengeance.	in thy willfulness to do hasty vengeance.
And lat us considere also who been they, and how manye been they,	And let us consider also who are they, and how many are they,
and whiche been they that consenteden to youre adversaries.	and which are they that consented to your adversaries.
And certes, as to the firste poynt, it is wel knowen whiche folk been	And certainly, as to the first point, it is well known which folk are
they that consenteden to youre hastif wilfulnesse,	they that consented to your hasty willfulness,
for trewely, alle tho that conseilleden yow to maken sodeyn werre ne been nat youre freendes.	for truly, all those who advised you to make sudden war are not your friends.
Lat us now considere whiche been they that ye holde so greetly youre freendes as to youre persone.	Let us now consider which are they that you consider so greatly your friends as to your person.
For al be it so that ye be myghty and riche, certes ye ne been but allone,	For although it be so that you are mighty and rich, certainly you are but alone,
for certes ye ne han no child but a doghter,	for certainly you have no child but a daughter,
ne ye ne han bretheren, ne cosyns germayns, ne noon oother neigh kynrede,	nor do you have neither brethren, nor first cousins, nor any other close relatives,
wherfore that youre enemys for drede sholde stinte to plede with yow or to destroye youre persone.	for which your enemies for dread should stop pleading with you or destroying your person.
Ye knowen also that youre richesses mooten been dispended in diverse parties,	You know also that your riches must be dispended in several parts,
and whan that every wight hath his part, they ne wollen taken but litel reward to venge thy deeth.	and when each person has his part, they will take but little regard to avenging thy death.
But thyne enemys been thre, and they han manie children, bretheren, cosyns, and oother ny kynrede.	But thine enemies are three, and they have many children, brethren, cousins, and other close kin.
And though so were that thou haddest slayn of hem two or three, yet dwellen ther ynowe	And though it so were that thou haddest slain of them two or three, yet dwell there enough
to wreken hir deeth and to sle thy persone.	to avenge their death and to slay thy person.
And though so be that youre kynrede be moore siker and stedefast than the kyn of youre adversarie,	And though it so be that your kin are more sure and steadfast than the kin of your adversary,
yet nathelees youre kynrede nys but a fer kynrede; they been but litel syb to yow,	yet nevertheless your kinship is but a far kinship; they are but little related to you,
and the kyn of youre enemys been ny syb to hem.	and the kin of your enemies are close relatives to them.
And certes, as in that, hir condicioun is bet than youres.	And certainly, in that respect, their condition is better than yours.
Thanne lat us considere also if the conseillyng of hem that conseilleden yow to taken sodeyn vengeaunce,	Then let us consider also the advice of those who advised you to take sudden vengeance,
wheither it accorde to resoun.	whether it accord to reason.
And certes, ye knowe wel `nay.'	And certainly, you know well `nay.'
For, as by right and resoun, ther may no man taken vengeance on no wight	For, by justice and reason, there may no man take vengeance on no person
but the juge that hath the jurisdiccioun of it,	but the judge that has the jurisdiction of it,
whan it is graunted hym to take thilke vengeance hastily or attemprely, as the lawe requireth.	when it is granted to him to take that vengeance hastily or temperately, as the law requires.
And yet mooreover of thilke word that Tullius clepeth `consentynge,'	And yet moreover of that word that Cicero calls `consenting,'
thou shalt considere if thy myght and thy power may consenten	thou should consider if thy might and thy power can consent
and suffise to thy wilfulnesse and to thy conseillours.	and suffice to thy willfulness and to thy advisors.
And certes thou mayst wel seyn that `nay.'	And certainly thou can well say that `nay.'
For sikerly, as for to speke proprely, we may do no thyng	For truly, strictly speaking, we can do no thing
but oonly swich thyng as we may doon rightfully.	but only such thing as we can do justly.
And certes rightfully ne mowe ye take no vengeance, as of youre propre auctoritee.	And certainly in justice must you take no vengeance, as of your own authority.
Thanne mowe ye seen that youre power ne consenteth nat, ne accordeth nat, with youre wilfulnesse.	Then must you see that your power is not consistent, nor accords not, with your willfulness.
"Lat us now examyne the thridde point, which Tullius clepeth `consequent.'	"Let us now examine the third point, that Cicero calls `consequent.'
Thou shalt understonde that the vengeance that thou purposest for to take is the consequent;	Thou shalt understand that the vengeance that thou intendest to take is the consequent;
and therof folweth another vengeaunce, peril, and werre, and othere damages withoute nombre,	and thereof follows another vengeance, peril, and war, and other damages without number,
of whiche we be nat war, as at this tyme.	of which we are not aware, at this time.
And as touchynge the fourthe point, that Tullius clepeth `engendrynge,'	And as touching the fourth point, what Cicero calls `engendering,'
thou shalt considere that this wrong which that is doon to thee	thou shalt consider that this wrong which that is done to thee
is engendred of the hate of thyne enemys,	is engendered by the hate of thine enemies,
and of the vengeance-takynge upon that wolde engendre another vengeance,	and by the vengeance-taking thereupon that would engender another vengeance,
and muchel sorwe and wastynge of richesses, as I seyde.	and much sorrow and wasting of riches, as I said.
"Now, sire, as to the point that Tullius clepeth `causes,' which that is the laste point,	"Now, sir, as to the point that Cicero calls `causes,' which is the last point,
thou shalt understonde that the wrong that thou hast receyved hath certeine causes,	thou shalt understand that the wrong that thou hast received has certain causes,
whiche that clerkes clepen Oriens and Efficiens, and Causa longinqua and Causa propinqua;	which clerks call Oriens and Efficiens, and Causa longinqua and Causa propinqua;
this is to seyn, the fer cause and the ny cause.	this is to say, the far cause and the near cause.
The fer cause is almyghty God, that is cause of alle thynges.	The far cause is almighty God, that is cause of all things .
The neer cause is thy thre enemys.	The near cause is thy three enemies.
The cause accidental was hate.	The cause accidental was hate.
The cause material been the fyve woundes of thy doghter.	The cause material are the five wounds of thy daughter.
The cause formal is the manere of hir werkynge that broghten laddres and cloumben in at thy wyndowes.	The cause formal is the manner of their working who brought ladders and climbed in at thy windows.
The cause final was for to sle thy doghter. It letted nat in as muche as in hem was.	The cause final was to slay thy daughter. It did not delay insofar as was in their power.
But for to speken of the fer cause, as to what ende they shul come, or what shal finally	But to speak of the far cause, as to what end they shall come, or what shall finally
bityde of hem in this caas, ne kan I nat deeme but by conjectynge and by supposynge.	happen to them in this case, nor can I judge except by conjecture and by supposing.
For we shull suppose that they shul come to a wikked ende,	For we should suppose that they shall come to a wicked end,
by cause that the Book of Decrees seith, `Seelden, or with greet peyne, been causes ybroght to good ende	because the Book of Decrees says, `Seldom, or with great effort, are causes brought to a good end
whanne they been baddely bigonne.'	when they are badly begun.'
"Now, sire, if men wolde axe me why that God suffred men to do yow this vileynye,	"Now, sir, if men would ask me why God allowed men to do you this villainy,
certes, I kan nat wel answere, as for no soothfastnesse.	certainly, I can not well answer, with any certainty.
For th' apostle seith that `the sciences and the juggementz of oure Lord God almyghty been ful depe;	For the apostle says that `the sciences and the judgments of our Lord God almighty are very deep;
ther may no man comprehende ne serchen hem suffisantly.'	there can no man comprehend nor study them sufficiently.'
Nathelees, by certeyne presumpciouns and conjectynges, I holde and bileeve	Nonetheless, by certain assumptions and conjectures, I hold and believe
that God, which that is ful of justice and of rightwisnesse, hath suffred this bityde by juste cause resonable.	that God, who is full of justice and of righteousness, has allowed this to happen by just reasonable cause.
"Thy name is Melibee; this is to seyn, `a man that drynketh hony.'	"Thy name is Melibee; this is to say, `a man that drinks honey.'
Thou hast ydronke so muchel hony of sweete temporeel richesses, and delices and honours of this world	Thou hast drunk so much honey of sweet temporal riches, and pleasures and honors of this world
that thou art dronken and hast forgeten Jhesu Crist thy creatour.	that thou art drunk and hast forgotten Jesus Christ thy creator.
Thou ne hast nat doon to hym swich honour and reverence as thee oughte,	Thou hast not done to him such honor and reverence as thee ought,
ne thou ne hast nat wel ytaken kep to the wordes of Ovide, that seith,	nor thou hast not well paid attention to the words of Ovid, who says,
`Under the hony of the goodes of the body is hyd the venym that sleeth the soule.'	`Under the honey of the goods of the body is hid the venom that slays the soul.'
And Salomon seith, `If thou hast founden hony, ete of it that suffiseth,	And Solomon says, `If thou hast found honey, eat of it what suffices,
for if thou ete of it out of mesure, thou shalt spewe' and be nedy and povre.	for if thou eat of it to excess, thou shalt vomit' and be needy and poor.
And peraventure Crist hath thee in despit, and	And perhaps Christ has thee in disdain, and
hath turned awey fro thee his face and his eeris of misericorde,	has turned away from thee his face and his ears of mercy,
and also he hath suffred that thou hast been punysshed in the manere that thow hast ytrespassed.	and also he has allowed that thou hast been punished in the manner that thou hast trespassed.
Thou hast doon synne agayn oure Lord Crist,	Thou hast done sin again our Lord Christ,
for certes, the three enemys of mankynde	for certainly, the three enemies of mankind
-- that is to seyn, the flessh, the feend, and the world --	-- that is to say, the flesh, the fiend, and the world --
thou hast suffred hem entre in to thyn herte wilfully by the wyndowes of thy body,	thou hast allowed them enter into thine heart willfully by the windows of thy body,
and hast nat defended thyself suffisantly agayns hire assautes and hire temptaciouns,	and hast not defended thyself sufficiently against their assaults and their temptations,
so that they han wounded thy soule in fyve places;	so that they have wounded thy soul in five places;
this is to seyn, the deedly synnes that been entred into thyn herte by thy fyve wittes.	this is to say, the deadly sins that are entered into thine heart by thy five senses.
And in the same manere oure Lord Crist hath woold and suffred	And in the same manner our Lord Christ has willed and allowed
that thy three enemys been entred into thyn house by the wyndowes	that thy three enemies are entered into thine house by the windows
and han ywounded thy doghter in the forseyde manere."	and have wounded thy daughter in the aforesaid manner."
"Certes," quod Melibee, "I se wel that ye enforce yow muchel by wordes to overcome me in swich manere	"Certainly," said Melibee, "I see well that you strengthen yourself much by words to overcome me in such a manner
that I shal nat venge me of myne enemys,	that I shall not avenge me on my enemies,
shewynge me the perils and the yveles that myghten falle of this vengeance.	showing me the perils and the evils that might fall because of this vengeance.
But whoso wolde considere in alle vengeances the perils and yveles that myghte sewe of vengeance-takynge,	But if amyone would consider in all vengeances the perils and evils that might follow from vengeance-taking,
a man wolde nevere take vengeance, and that were harm;	a man would never take vengeance, and that would be a harm;
for by the vengeance-takynge been the wikked men dissevered fro the goode men,	for by the vengeance-taking are the wicked men distinguished from the good men,
and they that han wyl to do wikkednesse restreyne hir wikked purpos,	and they that have will to do wickedness restrain their wicked purpose,
whan they seen the punyssynge and chastisynge of the trespassours."	when they see the punishing and chastising of the trespassers."
And yet seye I moore, that right as a singuler persone synneth in takynge vengeance of another man,	And yet say I more, that just as a private person sins in taking vengeance on another man,
right so synneth the juge if he do no vengeance of hem that it han disserved.	just so sins the judge if he do no vengeance on them that have deserved it.
For Senec seith thus: `That maister,' he seith, `is good that proveth shrewes.'	For Seneca says thus: `That master,' he says, `is good who reproves scoundrels.'
And as Cassidore seith, `A man dredeth to do outrages whan he woot and knoweth	And as Cassiodorus says, `A man dreads to do outrages when he knows and is aware
that it displeseth to the juges and the sovereyns.'	that it displeases the judges and the rulers.'
And another seith, `The juge that dredeth to do right maketh men shrewes.'	And another says, `The judge that dreads to do justice makes men scoundrels.'
And Seint Paul the Apostle seith in his Epistle, whan he writeth unto the Romayns, that	And Saint Paul the Apostle says in his Epistle, when he writes unto the Romans, that
`the juges beren nat the spere withouten cause,	`the judges do not bear the spear without cause,
but they beren it to punysse the shrewes and mysdoers and for to defende the goode men.'	but they bear it to punish the scoundrels and evildoers and to defend the good men.'
If ye wol thanne take vengeance of youre enemys, ye shul retourne or have youre recours to the juge	If you will then take vengeance on your enemies, you shall turn to or bring your case to the judge
that hath the jurisdiccion upon hem,	that has the jurisdiction upon them,
and he shal punysse hem as the lawe axeth and requireth."	and he shall punish them as the law asks and requires."
"A," quod Melibee, "this vengeance liketh me no thyng.	"A," said Melibee, "this vengeance pleases me not at all.
I bithenke me now and take heede how Fortune hath norissed me fro my childhede	I consider now and take heed how Fortune has nourished me from my childhood
and hath holpen me to passe many a stroong paas.	and has helped me to pass many a difficult situation.
Now wol I assayen hire, trowynge, with Goddes help, that she shal helpe me my shame for to venge."	Now will I test her, believing that, with God's help, she shall help me to avenge my shame."
"Certes," quod Prudence, "if ye wol werke by my conseil, ye shul nat assaye Fortune by no wey,	"Certainly," said Prudence, "if you will work by my advice, you shall not test Fortune in any way,
ne ye shul nat lene or bowe unto hire, after the word of Senec,	nor shall you rely on or bow unto her, according to the word of Seneca,
for `thynges that been folily doon, and that been in hope of Fortune, shullen nevere come to good ende.'	for `things that are foolishly done, and that are in hope of Fortune, shall never come to a good end.'
And, as the same Senec seith, `The moore cleer and the moore shynyng that Fortune is,	And, as the same Seneca says, `The more clear and the more shining that Fortune is,
the moore brotil and the sonner broken she is.'	the more brittle and the sooner broken she is.'
Trusteth nat in hire, for she nys nat stidefast ne stable,	Trust not in her, for she is not steadfast nor stable,
for whan thow trowest to be moost seur or siker of hire help,	for when thou believest her to be most sure or certain of her help,
she wol faille thee and deceyve thee.	she will fail thee and deceive thee.
And where as ye seyn that Fortune hath norissed yow fro youre childhede,	And whereas you say that Fortune has nourished you from your childhood,
I seye that in so muchel shul ye the lasse truste in hire and in hir wit.	I say that to that degree should you have the less trust in her and in her wisdom.
For Senec seith, `What man that is norissed by Fortune, she maketh hym a greet fool.'	For Seneca says, `Whatever man that is nourished by Fortune, she makes him a great fool.'
Now thanne, syn ye desire and axe vengeance, and the vengeance that is doon after the lawe	Now then, since you desire and ask vengeance, and the vengeance that is done according to the law
and bifore the juge ne liketh yow nat,	and before the judge pleases you not,
and the vengeance that is doon in hope of Fortune is perilous and uncertein,	and the vengeance that is done in hope of Fortune is perilous and uncertain,
thanne have ye noon oother remedie but for to have youre recours	then have you no other remedy but to have your recourse
unto the sovereyn Juge that vengeth alle vileynyes and wronges.	unto the Supreme Judge that avenges all villainies and wrongs.
And he shal venge yow after that hymself witnesseth, where as he seith,	And he shall avenge you according to what he himself witnesses, where he says,
`Leveth the vengeance to me, and I shal do it.'"	`Leave the vengeance to me, and I shall do it.'"
Melibee answerde, "If I ne venge me nat of the vileynye that men han doon to me,	Melibee answered, "If I do not avenge myself for the villainy that men have done to me,
I sompne or warne hem that han doon to me that vileynye,	I summon or announce to them that have done to me that villainy,
and alle othere, to do me another vileynye.	and all others, to do me another villainy.
For it is writen, `If thou take no vengeance of an oold vileynye,	For it is written, `If thou take no vengeance of an old villainy,
thou sompnest thyne adversaries to do thee a newe vileynye.'	thou summonest thine adversaries to do thee a new villainy.'
And also for my suffrance men wolden do me so muchel vileynye that	And also for my patience men would do to me so much villainy that
I myghte neither bere it ne susteene,	I might neither bear nor sustain it,
and so sholde I been put and holden overlowe.	and so should I be put down and considered too humble.
For men seyn, `In muchel suffrynge shul manye thynges falle unto thee whiche thou shalt nat mowe suffre.'"	For men say, `In much suffering shall many things happen to thee which thou shalt not be able to endure.'"
"Certes," quod Prudence, "I graunte yow that over-muchel suffraunce is nat good.	"Certainly," said Prudence, "I grant you that over-much patience is not good.
But yet ne folweth it nat therof that every persone to whom men doon vileynye take of it vengeance,	But yet it follows not thereof that every person to whom men do villainy should take vengeance for it,
for that aperteneth and longeth al oonly to the juges, for they shul venge the vileynyes and injuries.	for that pertains and belongs entirely only to the judges, for they shall avenge the villainies and injuries.
And therfore tho two auctoritees that ye han seyd above been oonly understonden in the juges,	And therefore those two authorities that you have spoken of above are only understood in the judges,
for whan they suffren over-muchel the wronges and the vileynyes to be doon withouten punysshynge,	for when they allow over-much the wrongs and the villainies to be done without punishing,
they sompne nat a man al oonly for to do newe wronges, but they comanden it.	they summon a man not entirely only to do new wrongs, but they command it.
Also a wys man seith that `the juge that correcteth nat the synnere comandeth and biddeth hym do synne.'	Also a wise man says that `the judge who corrects not the sinner commands and bids him to do sin.'
And the juges and sovereyns myghten in hir land so muchel suffre of the shrewes and mysdoeres	And the judges and rulers might in their land so much tolerate the scoundrels and evildoers
that they sholden, by swich suffrance, by proces of tyme wexen of swich power and myght	that they should, because of such tolerance, by the passage of time grow in such power and might
that they sholden putte out the juges and the sovereyns from hir places,	that they should put out the judges and the rulers from their places,
and atte laste maken hem lesen hire lordshipes.	and at the last make them lose their lordships.
"But lat us now putte that ye have leve to venge yow.	"But let us now suppose that you have leave to avenge yourself.
I seye ye been nat of myght and power as now to venge yow,	I say you are not of might and power right now to avenge yourself,
for if ye wole maken comparisoun unto the myght of youre adversaries, ye shul fynde in manye thynges that	for if you will make comparison unto the might of your adversaries, you shall find in many things that
I have shewed yow er this that hire condicion is bettre than youres.	I have showed you ere this that their condition is better than yours.
And therfore seye I that it is good as now that ye suffre and be pacient.	And therefore say I that it is good for now that you suffer and be patient.
"Forthermoore, ye knowen wel that after the comune sawe, `it is a woodnesse a man to stryve	"Furthermore, you know well that according to the common saying, `it is a madness for a man to strive
with a strenger or a moore myghty man than he is hymself,	with a stronger or a more mighty man than he is himself,
and for to stryve with a man of evene strengthe -- that is to seyn,	and to strive with a man of even strength -- that is to say,
with as strong a man as he is -- it is peril,	with as strong a man as he is -- it is perilous/ ,
and for to stryve with a weyker man, it is folie.'	and to strive with a weaker man, it is folly.'
And therfore sholde a man flee stryvynge as muchel as he myghte.	And therefore a man should flee striving as much as he might.
For Salomon seith, `It is a greet worshipe to a man to kepen hym fro noyse and stryf.'	For Solomon says, `It is a great honor to a man to keep himself from quarrels and strife.'
And if it so bifalle or happe that a man of gretter myght and strengthe	And if it so befall or happen that a man of greater might and strength
than thou art do thee grevaunce,	than thou art do thee grievance,
studie and bisye thee rather to stille the same grevaunce than for to venge thee.	take pains and busy thyself rather to still the same grievance than to avenge thyself.
For Senec seith that `he putteth hym in greet peril	For Seneca says that `he puts himself in great peril
that stryveth with a gretter man than he is hymself.'	that strives with a greater man than he is himself.'
And Catoun seith, `If a man of hyer estaat or degree, or moore myghty than thou,	And Cato says, `If a man of higher estate or degree, or more mighty than thou,
do thee anoy or grevaunce, suffre hym,	do thee annoyance or grievance, endure it,
for he that oones hath greved thee, may another tyme releeve thee and helpe.'	for he that once has grieved thee, may another time relieve thee and help.'
Yet sette I caas ye have bothe myght and licence for to venge yow,	Yet I assume (for the sake of argument) you have both might and permission to avenge yourself,
I seye that ther be ful manye thynges that shul restreyne yow of vengeance-takynge	I say that there are very many things that should restrain you from vengeance-taking
and make yow for to enclyne to suffre, and for to han pacience	and make you to incline to suffer, and to have patience
in the wronges that han been doon to yow.	in the wrongs that have been done to you.
First and foreward, if ye wole considere the defautes that been in youre owene persone,	First of all, if you will consider the faults that are in your own person,
for whiche defautes God hath suffred yow have this tribulacioun, as I have seyd yow heer-biforn.	for which faults God has allowed you to have this tribulation, as I have said to you before.
For the poete seith that `we oghte paciently taken the tribulacions	For the poet says that `we ought patiently to take the tribulations
that comen to us, whan we thynken and consideren that we han disserved to have hem.'	that come to us, when we think and consider that we have deserved to have them.'
And Seint Gregorie seith that `whan a man considereth wel the nombre of his defautes and of his synnes,	And Saint Gregory says that `when a man considers well the number of his faults and of his sins,
the peynes and the tribulaciouns that he suffreth semen the lesse unto hym;	the pains and the tribulations that he suffers seem the less unto him;
and in as muche as hym thynketh his synnes moore hevy and grevous,	and inasmuch as he thinks his sins more heavy and grievous,
in so muche semeth his peyne the lighter and the esier unto hym.'	insomuch seems his pain the lighter and the easier unto him.'
Also ye owen to enclyne and bowe youre herte	Also you ought to incline and bow your heart
to take the pacience of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, as seith Seint Peter in his Epistles.	to adopt the patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, as says Saint Peter in his Epistles.
`Jhesu Crist,' he seith, `hath suffred for us and yeven ensample to every man to folwe and sewe hym,	`Jesus Christ,' he says, `has suffered for us and given example to every man to follow and be guided by him,
for he dide nevere synne, ne nevere cam ther a vileyns word out of his mouth.	for he did never sin, nor never came there a villainous word out of his mouth.
Whan men cursed hym, he cursed hem noght, and whan men betten hym, he manaced hem noght.'	When men cursed him, he cursed them not, and when men beat him, he menaced them not.'
Also the grete pacience which the seintes that been in Paradys han had in tribulaciouns	Also the great patience which the saints that are in Paradise have had in tribulations
that they han ysuffred, withouten hir desert or gilt,	that they have suffered, without their deserts or guilt,
oghte muchel stiren yow to pacience.	ought much stir you to patience.
Forthermoore ye sholde enforce yow to have pacience,	Furthermore you should force yourself to have patience,
considerynge that the tribulaciouns of this world but litel while endure and soone passed been and goon,	considering that the tribulations of this world but little while endure and soon are passed and gone,
and the joye that a man seketh to have by pacience in tribulaciouns is perdurable,	and the joy that a man seeks to have by patience in tribulations is ever-lasting,
after that the Apostle seith in his epistle.	according to what the Apostle says in his epistle.
`The joye of God,' he seith, `is perdurable' -- that is to seyn, everelastynge.	`The joy of God,' he says, `is perdurable' -- that is to say, everlasting.
Also troweth and bileveth stedefastly that he nys nat wel ynorissed, ne wel ytaught,	Also think and believe steadfastly that he is not well trained, nor well taught,
that kan nat have pacience or wol nat receyve pacience.	who can not have patience or will not receive patience.
For Salomon seith that `the doctrine and the wit of a man is knowen by pacience.'	For Solomon says that `the doctrine and the wit of a man is known by patience.'
And in another place he seith that `he that is pacient governeth hym by greet prudence.'	And in another place he says that `he that is patient governs himself with great prudence.'
And the same Salomon seith, `The angry and wrathful man maketh noyses,	And the same Solomon says, `The angry and wrathful man makes quarrels,
and the pacient man atempreth hem and stilleth.'	and the patient man moderates and stills them.'
He seith also, `It is moore worth to be pacient than for to be right strong;	He says also, `It is more worthy to be patient than to be very strong;
and he that may have the lordshipe of his owene herte is moore to preyse than he that	and he that may have the lordship of his own heart is more to be praised than he that
by his force or strengthe taketh grete citees.'	by his force or strength takes great cities.'
And therfore seith Seint Jame in his Epistle that `pacience is a greet vertu of perfeccioun.'"	And therefore says Saint James in his Epistle that `patience is a great virtue of perfection.'"
"Certes," quod Melibee, "I graunte yow, dame Prudence, that pacience is a greet vertu of perfeccioun;	"Certainly," said Melibee, "I grant you, dame Prudence, that patience is a great virtue of perfection;
but every man may nat have the perfeccioun that ye seken;	but every man may not have the perfection that you seek;
ne I nam nat of the nombre of right parfite men,	nor am I of the number of very perfect men,
for myn herte may nevere been in pees unto the tyme it be venged.	for my heart may never be in peace until the time it is avenged.
And al be it so that it was greet peril to myne enemys	And although it be so that it was great peril to my enemies
to do me a vileynye in takynge vengeance upon me,	to do me a villainy in taking vengeance upon me,
yet tooken they noon heede of the peril, but fulfilleden hir wikked wyl and hir corage.	yet took they no heed of the peril, but fulfilled their wicked will and their desire.
And therfore me thynketh men oghten nat repreve me,	And therefore it seems to me men ought not reprove me,
though I putte me in a litel peril for to venge me,	though I put myself in a little peril in order to avenge myself,
and though I do a greet excesse; that is to seyn, that I venge oon outrage by another."	and though I do a great excess; that is to say, that I avenge one outrage by another."
"A," quod dame Prudence, "ye seyn youre wyl and as yow liketh,	"A," said dame Prudence, "you say your will and as you please,
but in no caas of the world a man sholde nat doon outrage ne excesse for to vengen hym.	but in no case of the world should a man do outrage nor excess to avenge himself.
For Cassidore seith that `as yvele dooth he that vengeth hym by outrage as he that dooth the outrage.'	For Cassiodorus says that `as evil does he that avenges himself by outrage as he that does the outrage.'
And therfore ye shul venge yow after the ordre of right; that is to seyn, by the lawe	And therefore you shall avenge yourself after the order of justice; that is to say, by the law
and noght by excesse ne by outrage.	and not by excess nor by outrage.
And also, if ye wol venge yow of the outrage of youre adversaries	And also, if you will avenge yourself of the outrage of your adversaries
in oother manere than right comandeth, ye synnen.	in other manner than justice commands, you sin.
And therfore seith Senec that `a man shal nevere vengen shrewednesse by shrewednesse.'	And therefore says Seneca that `a man shall never avenge wickedness by wickedness."
And if ye seye that right axeth a man to defenden violence by violence and fightyng by fightyng,	And if you say that justice asks a man to fight off violence by violence and fighting by fighting,
certes ye seye sooth, whan the defense is doon anon withouten intervalle or withouten tariyng or delay,	certainly you say truth, when the defense is done immediately without interval or without tarrying or delay,
for to deffenden hym and nat for to vengen hym.	to defend himself and not to avenge himself.
And it bihoveth that a man putte swich attemperance in his deffense	And it is fitting that a man put so much temperance in his defense
that men have no cause ne matiere to repreven hym that deffendeth hym of excesse and outrage,	that men have no cause nor matter to reprove him that defends himself from excess and outrage,
for ellis were it agayn resoun.	for otherwise it would be against reason.
Pardee, ye knowen wel that ye maken no deffense	By God, you know well that you make no defense
as now for to deffende yow, but for to venge yow;	right now to defend yourself, but to avenge yourself;
and so seweth it that ye han no wyl to do youre dede attemprely.	and so it follows that you have no will to do your deed temperately.
And therfore me thynketh that pacience is good. For Salomon seith that	And therefore it seems to me that patience is good. For Solomon says that
`he that is nat pacient shal have greet harm.'"	`he that is not patient shall have great harm.'"
"Certes," quod Melibee, "I graunte yow that whan a man is inpacient and wrooth of that	"Certainly," said Melibee, "I grant you that when a man is impatient and angry with that
that toucheth hym noght and that aperteneth nat unto hym, though it harme hym, it is no wonder.	which touches him not and which pertains not unto him, though it harm him, it is no wonder.
For the lawe seith that `he is coupable that entremetteth hym	For the law says that `he is guilty that intrudes himself
or medleth with swych thyng as aperteneth nat unto hym.'	or meddles with such thing as pertains not unto him.'
And Salomon seith that `he that entremetteth hym of the noyse or strif of another man	And Solomon says that `he that meddles with the quarrels or strife of another man
is lyk to hym that taketh an hound by the eris.'	is like to him that takes an hound by the ears.'
For right as he that taketh a straunge hound by the eris is outherwhile biten with the hound,	For just as he that takes a strange hound by the ears is at another time bitten by the hound,
right in the same wise is it resoun that he have harm that by his inpacience medleth hym	in just the same way it is reasonable that he have harm who by his impatience meddles himself
of the noyse of another man, wheras it aperteneth nat unto hym.	with the quarrels of another man, whereas it pertains not unto him.
But ye knowen wel that this dede -- that is to seyn,	But you know well that this deed -- that is to say,
my grief and my disese -- toucheth me right ny.	my grief and my suffering -- touches me very closely.
And therfore, though I be wrooth and inpacient, it is no merveille.	And therefore, though I am angry and impatient, it is no marvel.
And, savynge youre grace, I kan nat seen that it myghte greetly harme me though I tooke vengeaunce.	And, with all due respect to you, I can not see that it might greatly harm me though I took vengeance.
For I am richer and moore myghty than myne enemys been;	For I am richer and more mighty than my enemies are;
and wel knowen ye that by moneye and by havynge grete possessions	and you well know that by money and by having great possessions
been alle the thynges of this world governed.	are all the things of this world governed.
And Salomon seith that `alle thynges obeyen to moneye.'"	And Solomon says that `all things obey to money.'"
Whan Prudence hadde herd hir housbonde avanten hym of his richesse	When Prudence had heard her husband boast of his riches
and of his moneye, dispreisynge the power of his adversaries,	and of his money, belittling the power of his adversaries,
she spak and seyde in this wise:	she spoke and said in this manner:
"Certes, deere sire, I graunte yow that ye been riche and myghty	"Certainly, dear sir, I grant you that you are rich and mighty
and that the richesses been goode to hem that han wel ygeten hem and wel konne usen hem.	and that riches are good to those that have well gotten them and well know how to use them.
For right as the body of a man may nat lyven withoute the soule,	For just as the body of a man can not live without the soul,
namoore may it lyve withouten temporeel goodes.	no more than it can live without temporal goods.
And by richesses may a man gete hym grete freendes.	And by riches a man get can himself great friends.
And therfore seith Pamphilles: `If a net-herdes doghter,' seith he, `be riche,	And therefore says Pamphilles: `If a cowherd's daughter,' says he, `is rich,
she may chesen of a thousand men which she wol take to hir housbonde,	she may choose of a thousand men which she will take to her husband,
for, of a thousand men, oon wol nat forsaken hire ne refusen hire.'	for, of a thousand men, not one will forsake her nor refuse her.'
And this Pamphilles seith also, `If thow be right happy -- that is to seyn,	And this Pamphilles says also, `If thou be very happy -- that is to say,
if thou be right riche -- thou shalt fynde a greet nombre of felawes and freendes.	if thou be very rich -- thou shalt find a great number of fellows and friends.
And if thy fortune change that thou wexe povre, farewel freendshipe and felaweshipe,	And if thy fortune change that thou wax poor, farewell friendship and fellowship,
for thou shalt be alloone withouten any compaignye, but if it be the compaignye of povre folk.'	for thou shalt be alone without any company, except if it be the company of poor folk.'
And yet seith this Pamphilles moreover that `they that been thralle and bonde of lynage	And yet says this Pamphilles moreover that `they that are enslaved and in bondage by birth
shullen been maad worthy and noble by the richesses.'	shall be made worthy and noble by riches.'
And right so as by richesses ther comen manye goodes,	And just as by riches there come many goods,
right so by poverte come ther manye harmes and yveles,	just so by poverty come there many harms and evils,
for greet poverte constreyneth a man to do manye yveles.	for great poverty constrains a man to do many evils.
And therfore clepeth Cassidore poverte the mooder of ruyne;	And therefore Cassiodorus calls poverty the mother of ruin;
that is to seyn, the mooder of overthrowynge or fallynge doun.	that is to say, the mother of overthrowing or falling down.
And therfore seith Piers Alfonce, `Oon of the gretteste adversitees of this world is	And therefore says Petrus Alphonsus, `One of the greatest adversities of this world is
whan a free man by kynde or of burthe is constreyned by poverte	when a man free by nature or by birth is constrained by poverty
to eten the almesse of his enemy,'	to eat the alms of his enemy,'
and the same seith Innocent in oon of his bookes. He seith that	and the same says Innocent in one of his books. He says that
`sorweful and myshappy is the condicioun of a povre beggere;	`sorrowful and unfortunate is the condition of a poor beggar;
for if he axe nat his mete, he dyeth for hunger;	for if he does not beg for his food, he dies for hunger;
and if he axe, he dyeth for shame; and algates necessitee constreyneth hym to axe.'	and if be begs, he dies for shame, and yet necessity constrains him to beg.'
And seith Salomon that `bet it is to dye than for to have swich poverte.'	And says Solomon that `better it is to die than to have such poverty.'
And as the same Salomon seith, `Bettre it is to dye of bitter deeth	And as the same Solomon says, `Better it is to die of bitter death
than for to lyven in swich wise.'	than to live in such a way.'
By thise resons that I have seid unto yow and by manye othere resons that I koude seye,	By these reasons that I have said unto you and by many other reasons that I could say,
I graunte yow that richesses been goode to hem that geten hem wel	I grant you that riches are good to them that get them well
and to hem that wel usen tho richesses.	and to them that well use those riches.
And therfore wol I shewe yow hou ye shul have yow, and how ye shul bere yow	And therefore will I show you how you should behave, and how you should bear yourself
in gaderynge of richesses, and in what manere ye shul usen hem.	in gathering of riches, and in what manner you shall use them.
"First, ye shul geten hem withouten greet desir, by good leyser, sokyngly and nat over-hastily.	"First, you shall get them without great desire, by good deliberation, slowly and not over-hastily.
For a man that is to desirynge to gete richesses abaundoneth hym	For a man that is too desiring to get riches devotes himself
first to thefte, and to alle othere yveles;	first to theft, and to all other evils;
and therfore seith Salomon, `He that hasteth hym to bisily to wexe riche shal be noon innocent.'	and therefore says Solomon, `He that hastens him too busily to wax rich shall be no innocent.'
He seith also that `the richesse that hastily cometh to a man soone	He says also that `the riches that hastily come to a man soon
and lightly gooth and passeth fro a man,	and easily go and pass from a man,
but that richesse that cometh litel and litel wexeth alwey and multiplieth.'	but those riches that come little by little always grow and multiply.'
And, sire, ye shul geten richesses by youre wit and by youre travaille unto youre profit,	And, sir, you shall get riches by your wit and by your travail unto your advantage,
and that withouten wrong or harm doynge to any oother persone.	and that without doing wrong or harm to any other person.
For the lawe seith that `ther maketh no man himselven riche, if he do harm to another wight.'	For the law says that `there makes no man himself rich, if he does harm to another person.'
This is to seyn, that nature deffendeth and forbedeth by right that	This is to say, that nature prohibits and forbids justly that
no man make hymself riche unto the harm of another persone.	any man make himself rich unto the harm of another person.
And Tullius seith that `no sorwe, ne no drede of deeth, ne no thyng	And Cicero says that `no sorrow, nor no dread of death, nor no thing
that may falle unto a man, is so muchel agayns	that may happen to a man, is so much against
nature as a man to encressen his owene profit to the harm of another man.	nature as for a man to increase his own advantage to the harm of another man.
And though the grete men and the myghty men geten richesses moore lightly than thou,	And though the great men and the mighty men get riches more easily than thou,
yet shaltou nat been ydel ne slow to do thy profit, for thou shalt in alle wise flee ydelnesse.'	yet thou shalt not be idle nor slow to do thy benefit, for thou shalt in all ways flee idleness.'
For Salomon seith that `ydelnesse techeth a man to do manye yveles.'	For Solomon says that `idleness teaches a man to do many evils.'
And the same Salomon seith that `he that travailleth and bisieth hym to tilien his land shal eten breed,	And the same Solomon says that `he that works and busies himself to till his land shall eat bread,
but he that is ydel and casteth hym to no bisynesse	but he that is idle and devotes himself to no business
ne occupacioun shal falle into poverte and dye for hunger.'	nor occupation shall fall into poverty and die for hunger.'
And he that is ydel and slow kan nevere fynde covenable tyme for to doon his profit.	And he that is idle and slow can never find suitable time to earn his profit.
For ther is a versifiour who seith that `the ydel man excuseth hym in wynter by cause	For there is a versifier says that `the idle man excuses himself in winter because
of the grete coold, and in somer by enchesoun of the greete heete.'	of the great cold, and in summer by reason of the great heat.'
For thise causes seith Caton, `Waketh and enclyneth nat yow over-muchel for to slepe,	For these causes says Cato, `Wake and incline you not over-much to sleep,
for over-muchel reste norisseth and causeth manye vices.'	for over-much rest nourishes and causes many vices.'
And therfore seith Seint Jerome, `Dooth somme goode dedes that the devel,	And therefore says Saint Jerome, `Do some good deeds that the devil,
who is oure enemy, ne fynde yow nat unocupied.'	which is our enemy, not find you unoccupied.'
For the devel ne taketh nat lightly unto his werkynge swiche as he fyndeth occupied in goode werkes.	For the devil takes not easily unto his power such as he finds occupied in good works.
"Thanne thus in getynge richesses ye mosten flee ydelnesse.	"Then thus in getting riches you must flee idleness.
And afterward, ye shul use the richesses which ye have geten by youre wit and by youre travaille	And afterward, you must use the riches which you have gotten by your wit and by your labor
in swich a manere that men holde yow nat to scars, ne to sparynge, ne to fool-large	in such a manner that men consider you not too niggardly, nor too frugal, nor too foolishly generous
-- that is to seyen, over-large a spendere.	-- that is to say, over-generous a spender.
For right as men blamen an avaricious man by cause of his scarsetee and chyncherie,	For just as men blame an avaricious man because of his niggardliness and miserliness,
in the same wise is he to blame that spendeth over-largely.	in the same way is he to blame that spends over-generously.
And therfore seith Caton: `Use,' he seith, `thy richesses that thou hast geten	And therefore says Cato: `Use,' he says, `thy riches that thou hast gotten
in swich a manere that men have no matiere ne cause to calle thee neither wrecche ne chynche,	in such a manner that men have no reason nor cause to call thee neither wretch nor miser,
for it is a greet shame to a man to have a povere herte and a riche purs.'	for it is a great shame to a man to have a poor heart and a rich purse.'
He seith also, `The goodes that thou hast ygeten, use hem by mesure;'	He says also, `The goods that thou hast gotten, use them by measure;'
that is to seyn, spende hem mesurably,	that is to say, spend them moderately,
for they that folily wasten and despenden the goodes that they han,	for they who foolishly waste and squander the goods that they have,
whan they han namoore propre of hir owene, they shapen hem to take the goodes of another man.	when they have no more property of their own, they devote themselves to taking the goods of another man.
I seye thanne that ye shul fleen avarice,	I say then that you must flee avarice,
usynge youre richesses in swich manere that men seye nat that youre richesses been yburyed	using your riches in such a manner that men say not that your riches are buried
but that ye have hem in youre myght and in youre weeldynge.	but that you have them in your power and in your control.
For a wys man repreveth the avaricious man, and seith thus in two vers:	For a wise man reproves the avaricious man, and says thus in two verses:
`Wherto and why burieth a man his goodes by his grete avarice,	`For what reason and why buries a man his goods by his great avarice,
and knoweth wel that nedes moste he dye?	and he knows well that by necessity he must die?
For deeth is the ende of every man as in this present lyf.'	For death is the end of every man in this present life.'
And for what cause or enchesoun joyneth he hym or knytteth he hym so faste unto his goodes	And for what cause or reason he joins himself or he knits himself so fast unto his goods
that alle hise wittes mowen nat disseveren hym or departen hym from his goodes,	that all his wits can not separate him or depart him from his goods,
and knoweth wel, or oghte knowe, that whan he is deed	and knows well, or ought know, that when he is dead
he shal no thyng bere with hym out of this world?	he shall nothing bear with him out of this world?
And therfore seith Seint Austyn that `the avaricious man is likned unto helle,	And therefore says Saint Austin that `the avaricious man is likened unto hell,
that the moore it swelweth the moore desir it hath to swelwe and devoure.'	that the more it swallows the more desire it has to swallow and devour.'
And as wel as ye wolde eschewe to be called an avaricious man or chynche,	And as well as you would shun to be called an avaricious man or miser,
as wel sholde ye kepe yow and governe yow in swich a wise who men calle yow nat fool-large.	as well should you keep yourself and govern yourself in such a way that men do not call you foolishly generous.
Therfore seith Tullius: `The goodes,' he seith, `of thyn hous ne sholde nat been hyd ne kept so cloos,	Therefore says Cicero: `The goods,' he says, `of thine house should not be hidden nor kept so close,
but that they myghte been opened by pitee and debonairetee'	but that they might not be opened by pity and graciousness'
(that is to seyn, to yeven part to hem that han greet nede),	(that is to say, to give part to them that have great need),
`ne thy goodes shullen nat been so opene to been every mannes goodes.'	`Nor thy goods must not be so open to be every man's goods.'
Afterward, in getynge of youre richesses and in usynge hem ye shul alwey have thre thynges in youre herte	Afterward, in getting of your riches and in using them you must always have three things in your heart
(that is to seyn, oure Lord God, conscience, and good name).	(that is to say, our Lord God, conscience, and good name).
First, ye shul have God in youre herte,	First, you shall have God in your heart,
and for no richesse ye shullen do no thyng which may in any manere displese God,	and for no riches you shall do any thing which may in any manner displease God,
that is youre creatour and makere.	that is your creator and maker.
For after the word of Salomon, `It is bettre to have a litel good with the love of God	For after the word of Solomon, `It is better to have a little good with the love of God
than to have muchel good and tresour and lese the love of his Lord God.'	than to have much good and treasure and lose the love of his Lord God.'
And the prophete seith that `bettre it is to been a good man and have litel good and tresour	And the prophet says that `better it is to be a good man and have little good and treasure
than to been holden a shrewe and have grete richesses.'	than to be held a scoundrel and have great riches.'
And yet seye I ferthermoore, that ye sholde alwey doon youre bisynesse to gete yow richesses,	And yet say I furthermore, that you should always do your business to get yourself riches,
so that ye gete hem with good conscience.	providing that you get them with good conscience.
And th' Apostle seith that `ther nys thyng in this world of which	And the Apostle says that `there is nothing in this world of which
we sholden have so greet joye as whan oure conscience bereth us good witnesse.'	we should have so great joy as when our conscience bears us good witness.'
And the wise man seith, `The substance of a man is ful good,	And the wise man says, `The substance of a man is very good,
whan synne is nat in mannes conscience.'	when sin is not in man's conscience.'
Afterward, in getynge of youre richesses and in usynge of hem,	Afterward, in getting of your riches and in using of them,
yow moste have greet bisynesse and greet diligence that youre goode name be alwey kept and conserved.	you must have great effort and greet diligence that your good name be always kept and conserved.
For Salomon seith that `bettre it is and moore it availleth a man to have a good name	For Solomon says that `better it is and more it avails a man to have a good name
than for to have grete richesses.'	than to have great riches.'
And therfore he seith in another place, `Do greet diligence,' seith Salomon,	And therefore he says in another place, `Do great diligence,' says Solomon,
`in kepyng of thy freend and of thy goode name;	`in keeping of thy friend and of thy good name;
for it shal lenger abide with thee than any tresour, be it never so precious.'	for it shall longer abide with thee than any treasure, be it never so precious.'
And certes he sholde nat be called a gentil man that after God and good conscience, alle thynges left,	And certainly he should not be called a gentle man who after God and good conscience, all other things left aside,
ne dooth his diligence and bisynesse to kepen his goode name.	does his best efforts and effort to keep his good name.
And Cassidore seith that `it is signe of a gentil herte	And Cassiodorus says that `it is sign of a gentle heart
whan a man loveth and desireth to han a good name.'	when a man loves and desires to have a good name.'
And therfore seith Seint Austyn that `ther been two thynges that arn necessarie and nedefulle,	And therefore says Saint Austin that `there are two things that are necessary and needful,
and that is good conscience and good loos;	and that is good conscience and good reputation;
that is to seyn, good conscience to thyn owene persone inward and good loos for thy neighebor outward.'	that is to say, good conscience to thine own person inward and good reputation for thy neighbor outward.'
And he that trusteth hym so muchel in his goode conscience	And he that trusts himself so much in his good conscience
that he displeseth, and setteth at noght his goode name or loos,	that he displeases, and sets at naught his good name or reputation,
and rekketh noght though he kepe nat his goode name, nys but a crueel cherl.	and cares not though he keep not his good name, is but a cruel churl.
"Sire, now have I shewed yow how ye shul do in getynge richesses, and how ye shullen usen hem,	"Sir, now have I showed you how you shall do in getting riches, and how you shall use them,
and I se wel that for the trust that ye han in youre richesses	and I see well that for the trust that you have in your riches
ye wole moeve werre and bataille.	you will provoke war and battle.
I conseille yow that ye bigynne no werre in trust of youre richesses,	I advise you that you begin no war in trust of your riches,
for they ne suffisen noght werres to mayntene.	for they do not suffice to maintain wars.
And therfore seith a philosophre, `That man that desireth and wole algates han werre, shal nevere have suffisaunce,	And therefore says a philosopher, `That man who desires and will continually have war, shall never have enough,
for the richer that he is, the gretter despenses moste he make, if he wole have worshipe and victorie.'	for the richer that he is, the greater expenditures must he make, if he will have worship and victory.'
And Salomon seith that `the gretter richesses that a man hath, the mo despendours he hath.'	And Solomon says that `the greater riches that a man has, the more spenders he has.'
And, deere sire, al be it so that for youre richesses ye mowe have muchel folk,	And, dear sir, although it be so that for your riches you can have much folk,
yet bihoveth it nat, ne it is nat good, to bigynne werre whereas ye mowe	yet it is not suitable, nor is it any good, to begin war whereas you can
in oother manere have pees unto youre worshipe and profit.	in another manner have peace unto your honor and advantage.
For the victorie of batailles that been in this world lyth nat in greet nombre or multitude	For the victory of battles that are in this world lies not in great number or multitude
of the peple, ne in the vertu of man,	of the people, nor in the strength of man,
but it lith in the wyl and in the hand of oure Lord God Almyghty.	but it lies in the will and in the hand of our Lord God Almighty.
And therfore Judas Machabeus, which was Goddes knyght,	And therefore Judas Machabeus, who was God's knight,
whan he sholde fighte agayn his adversarie that hadde a gretter nombre	when he had to fight against his adversary who has a greater number
and a gretter multitude of folk and strenger than was this peple of Machabee,	and a greater multitude of folk and stronger than was this people of Machabee,
yet he reconforted his litel compaignye, and seyde right in this wise:	yet he comforted his little company, and said exactly in this way:
`Als lightly,' quod he, `may oure Lord God Almyghty yeve victorie to a fewe folk as to many folk,	`As easily,' said he, `may our Lord God Almighty give victory to a few folk as to many folk,
for the victorie of a bataile comth nat by the grete nombre of peple,	for the victory of a battle comes not by the great number of people,
but it cometh from oure Lord God of hevene.'	but it comes from our Lord God of heaven.'
And, deere sire, for as muchel as ther is no man certein if he be worthy that	And, dear sir, since there is no man certain if he be worthy that
God yeve hym victorie . . . or not, in accordance with what Salomon seith,	God give him victory . . . or not, according to what Solomon says,
therfore every man sholde greetly drede werres to bigynne.	therefore every man should greatly dread to begin wars.
And by cause that in batailles fallen manye perils,	And because in battles many perils befall,
and happeth outher while that as soone is the grete man slayn as the litel man;	and happens another time that as soon is the great man slain as the little man;
and as it is writen in the seconde Book of Kynges,	and as it is written in the second Book of Kings,
`The dedes of batailles been aventurouse and nothyng certeyne,	`The deeds of battles are subject to chance and in no way certain,
for as lightly is oon hurt with a spere as another';	for as easily is one hurt with one spear as another';
and for ther is gret peril in werre, therfore sholde a man flee and eschue werre,	and for there is great peril in war, therefore should a man flee and shun war,
in as muchel as a man may goodly.	insomuch as a man may goodly (do so).
For Salomon seith, `He that loveth peril shal falle in peril.'"	For Solomon says, `He who loves peril shall fall in peril.'"
After that Dame Prudence hadde spoken in this manere, Melibee answerde and seyde,	After Dame Prudence had spoken in this manner, Melibee answered and said,
"I see wel, dame Prudence, that by youre faire wordes and by youre resouns	"I see well, dame Prudence, that by your fair words and by your reasons
that ye han shewed me, that the werre liketh yow no thyng;	that you have showed me, that the war not at all pleases you;
but I have nat yet herd youre conseil, how I shal do in this nede."	but I have not yet heard your advice, how I shall do in this urgent matter."
"Certes," quod she, "I conseille yow that ye accorde with youre adversaries and that ye have pees with hem.	"Certainly," said she, "I advise you that you agree with your adversaries and that you have peace with them.
For Seint Jame seith in his Epistles that `by concord and pees the smale richesses wexen grete,	For Saint James says in his Epistles that `by agreeent and peace the small riches wax great,
and by debaat and discord the grete richesses fallen doun.'	and by debate and discord the great riches fall down.'
And ye knowen wel that oon of the gretteste and moost sovereyn thyng	And you know well that one of the greatest and most excellent things
that is in this world is unytee and pees.	that is in this world is unity and peace.
And therfore seyde oure Lord Jhesu Crist to his apostles in this wise:	And therefore said our Lord Jesus Christ to his apostles in this manner:
`Wel happy and blessed been they that loven and purchacen pees, for they been called children of God.'"	`Well happy and blessed are they that love and bring about peace, for they are called children of God.'"
"A," quod Melibee, "now se I wel that ye loven nat myn honour ne my worshipe.	"A," said Melibee, "now see I well that you love not my honor nor my worthiness.
Ye knowen wel that myne adversaries han bigonnen this debaat and bryge by hire outrage,	You know well that my adversaries have begun this debate and strife by their outrage,
and ye se wel that they ne requeren ne preyen me nat of pees,	and you see well that they neither require nor pray me for peace,
ne they asken nat to be reconsiled.	nor they ask not to be reconciled.
Wol ye thanne that I go and meke me, and obeye me to hem, and crie hem mercy?	Will you then that I go and humble myself, and be subject to them, and beg them for mercy?
For sothe, that were nat my worshipe.	Indeed, that would not be to my honor.
For right as men seyn that `over-greet hoomlynesse engendreth dispreisynge,'	For just as men say that `over-great familiarity engenders contempt,'
 so fareth it by to greet humylitee or mekenesse."	so fares it by too great humility or meekness."
Thanne bigan dame Prudence to maken semblant of wratthe and seyde:	Then began dame Prudence to make the outward appearance of wrath and said:
"Certes, sire, sauf youre grace, I love youre honour and youre profit	"Certainly, sir, with all due respect to you, I love your honor and your well-being
as I do myn owene, and evere have doon;	as I do my own, and ever have done;
ne ye, ne noon oother, seyn nevere the contrarie.	nor you, nor any other, can say never the contrary.
And yit if I hadde seyd that ye sholde han purchaced the pees	And yet if I had said that you should have brought about the peace
and the reconsiliacioun, I ne hadde nat muchel mystaken me ne seyd amys.	and the reconciliation, I had not much mistaken me nor said amiss.
For the wise man seith, `The dissensioun bigynneth by another man,	For the wise man says, `The dissension begins by another man,
 and the reconsilyng bygynneth by thyself.'	and the reconciling begins by thyself.'
And the prophete seith, `Flee shrewednesse and do goodnesse;	And the prophet says, `Flee shrewdness and do goodness;
seke pees and folwe it, as muchel as in thee is.'	seek peace and follow it, as much as in thee is.'
Yet seye I nat that ye shul rather pursue to youre adversaries for pees than they shuln to yow.	Yet say I not that you should rather sue to your adversaries for peace than they should (offer peace) to you.
For I knowe wel that ye been so hard-herted that ye wol do no thyng for me.	For I know well that you are so hard-hearted that you will do nothing for me.
And Salomon seith, `He that hath over-hard an herte, atte laste he shal myshappe and mystyde.'"	And Solomon says, `He that has over-hard a heart, at the last he shall have bad luck and suffer misfortune.'"
Whanne Melibee hadde herd dame Prudence maken semblant of wratthe, he seyde in this wise:	When Melibee had heard dame Prudence make the appearance of wrath, he said in this manner:
"Dame, I prey yow that ye be nat displesed of thynges that I seye,	"Dame, I pray you that you be not displeased by things that I say,
for ye knowe wel that I am angry and wrooth, and that is no wonder;	for you know well that I am angry and wrathful, and that is no wonder;
and they that been wrothe witen nat wel what they don ne what they seyn.	and they that are wrathful know not well what they do nor what they say.
Therfore the prophete seith that `troubled eyen han no cleer sighte.'	Therefore the prophet says that `troubled eyes have no clear sight.'
But seyeth and conseileth me as yow liketh, for I am redy to do right as ye wol desire;	But say and advise me as you like, for I am ready to do just as you will desire;
and if ye repreve me of my folye,	and if you reprove me for my folly,
I am the moore holden to love yow and to preyse yow.	I am the more obligated to love you and to praise you.
For Salomon seith that `he that repreveth hym that dooth folye,	For Solomon says that `he that reproves him who does folly,
he shal fynde gretter grace than he that deceyveth hym by sweete wordes.'"	he shall find greater grace than he who deceives him by sweet words.'"
Thanne seide dame Prudence, "I make no semblant of wratthe ne anger, but for youre grete profit.	Then said dame Prudence, "I make no outward appearance of wrath nor anger, but for your great advantage.
For Salomon seith, `He is moore worth that repreveth or chideth a fool for his folye,	For Solomon says, `He is more worthy that reproves or chides a fool for his folly,
shewynge hym semblant of wratthe,	showing him the outward appearance of wrath,
than he that supporteth hym and preyseth hym in his mysdoynge and laugheth at his folye.'	than he who supports him and praises him in his misdoing and laughs at his folly.'
And this same Salomon seith afterward that	And this same Solomon says afterward that
`by the sorweful visage of a man'	`by the sorrowful visage of a man'
(that is to seyn by the sory and hevy contenaunce of a man)	(that is to say by the sorry and heavy countenance of a man)
`the fool correcteth and amendeth hymself.'"	`the fool corrects and amends himself.'"
Thanne seyde Melibee, "I shal nat konne answere to	Then said Melibee, "I shall not know how to answer to
so manye faire resouns as ye putten to me and shewen.	so many fair reasons as you set forth and show to me.
Seyeth shortly youre wyl and youre conseil, and I am al redy to fulfille and parfourne it."	Say shortly your will and your advice, and I am all ready to fulfill and perform it."
Thanne dame Prudence discovered al hir wyl to hym and seyde,	Then dame Prudence uncovered all her will to him and said,
"I conseille yow," quod she, "aboven alle thynges, that ye make pees bitwene God and yow,	"I advise you," said she, "above all things , that you make peace between God and you,
and beth reconsiled unto hym and to his grace.	and are reconciled unto him and to his grace.
For, as I have seyd yow heer biforn, God hath suffred yow	For, as I have said to you here before this, God has allowed you
to have this tribulacioun and disese for youre synnes.	to have this tribulation and suffering for your sins.
And if ye do as I sey yow, God wol sende youre adversaries unto yow	And if you do as I tell you, God will send your adversaries unto you
and maken hem fallen at youre feet, redy to do youre wyl and youre comandementz.	and make them fall at your feet, ready to do your will and your commandments.
For Salomon seith, `Whan the condicioun of man is plesaunt and likynge to God,	For Solomon says, `When the condition of man is pleasant and pleasing to God,
he chaungeth the hertes of the mannes adversaries and constreyneth hem to biseken hym of pees and of grace.'	he changes the hearts of the man's adversaries and constrains them to beseech him for peace and for grace.'
And I prey yow lat me speke with youre adversaries in privee place,	And I pray you let me speak with your adversaries in a private place,
for they shul nat knowe that it be of youre wyl or of youre assent.	for they must not know that it is of your will or of your assent.
And thanne, whan I knowe hir wil and hire entente, I may conseille yow the moore seurely."	And then, when I know their will and their intent, I can advise you the more surely."
"Dame," quod Melibee, "dooth youre wil and youre likynge;	"Dame," said Melibee, "do your will and your pleasure;
for I putte me hoolly in youre disposicioun and ordinaunce."	for I put me wholly in your disposition and ordinance."
Thanne dame Prudence, whan she saugh the goode wyl of hir housbonde, delibered and took avys in hirself,	Then dame Prudence, when she saw the good will of her husband, considered and pondered in herself,
thinkinge how she myghte brynge this nede unto a good conclusioun and to a good ende.	thinking how she might bring this urgent matter unto a good conclusion and to a good end.
And whan she saugh hir tyme, she sente for thise adversaries to come unto hire into a pryvee place	And when she saw her time, she sent for these adversaries to come unto her into a private place
and shewed wisely unto hem the grete goodes that comen of pees	and showed wisely unto them the great goods that come of peace
and the grete harmes and perils that been in werre,	and the great harms and perils that are in war,
and seyde to hem in a goodly manere hou that hem oughten have greet repentaunce	and said to them in a goodly manner how that they ought to have great repentance
of the injurie and wrong that they hadden doon to Melibee hir lord,	for the injury and wrong that they had done to Melibee her lord,
and unto hire, and to hire doghter.	and unto her, and to her daughter.
And whan they herden the goodliche wordes of dame Prudence,	And when they heard the goodly words of dame Prudence,
they weren so supprised and ravysshed and hadden so greet joye of hire that wonder was to telle.	they were so taken and ravished and had such great joy of her that it was a wonder to tell.
"A, lady," quod they, "ye han shewed unto us the blessynge of swetnesse,	"A, lady," said they, "you have showed unto us the blessing of sweetness,
after the sawe of David the prophete,	according to the saying of David the prophet,
for the reconsilynge which we been nat worthy to have in no manere,	for the reconciliation which we are not worthy to have in any manner,
but we oghte requeren it with greet contricioun and humylitee,	but we ought to request it with great contrition and humility,
ye of youre grete goodnesse have presented unto us.	that you of your great goodness have presented unto us.
Now se we wel that the science and the konnynge of Salomon is ful trewe.	Now see we well that the knowledge and the cunning of Solomon is very true.
For he seith that `sweete wordes multiplien and encreescen freendes	For he says that `sweet words multiply and increase friends
 and maken shrewes to be debonaire and meeke.'	and make scoundrels to be gentle and meek.'
"Certes," quod they, "we putten oure dede and al oure matere and cause al hoolly in youre goode wyl	"Certainly," said they, "we put our actions and all our matters and cause all wholly in your good will
and been redy to obeye to the speche and comandement of my lord Melibee.	and are ready to obey to the speech and commandment of my lord
And therfore, deere and benygne lady, we preien yow and biseke yow as mekely as we konne and mowen	And therefore, dear and benign lady, we pray you and beseech you as meekly as we know how and are able
that it lyke unto youre grete goodnesse to fulfillen in dede youre goodliche wordes,	that it be pleasing unto your great goodness to fulfill in deed your goodly words,
for we consideren and knowelichen that we han offended and greved my lord Melibee out of mesure,	for we consider and acknowledge that we have offended and grieved my lord Melibee out of measure,
so ferforth that we be nat of power to maken his amendes.	so far that we are not of power to make his amends.
And therfore we oblige and bynden us and oure freendes for to doon al his wyl and his comandementz.	And therefore we pledge and bind us and our friends to do all his will and his commandments.
But peraventure he hath swich hevynesse and swich wratthe to us-ward by cause of oure offense	But perhaps he has such heaviness and such wrath toward us because of our offense
that he wole enjoyne us swich a peyne as we mowe nat bere ne susteene.	that he will impose on us such a punishment as we can not bear nor sustain.
And therfore, noble lady, we biseke to youre wommanly pitee	And therefore, noble lady, we beseech to your womanly pity
to taken swich avysement in this nede that	to take such thought in this urgent matter that
we ne oure freendes be nat desherited ne destroyed thurgh oure folye."	we nor our friends are not dispossessed nor destroyed through our folly."
"Certes," quod Prudence, "it is an hard thyng and right perilous	"Certainly," said Prudence, "it is a hard thing and very perilous
that a man putte hym al outrely in the arbitracioun and juggement,	that a man put himself entirely in the power of decision and judgment,
and in the myght and power of his enemys.	and in the might and power of his enemies.
For Salomon seith, `Leeveth me, and yeveth credence to that I shal seyn: I seye,' quod he,	For Solomon says, `Believe me, and give credence to what I shall say: I say,' said he,
`ye peple, folk and governours of hooly chirche,	`you people, folk and governors of holy church,
to thy sone, to thy wyf, to thy freend, ne to thy broother	to thy son, to thy wife, to thy friend, nor to thy brother
ne yeve thou nevere myght ne maistrie of thy body whil thou lyvest.'	give thou never power (over) nor mastery of thy body while thou livest.'
Now sithen he deffendeth that man sholde nat yeven to his broother	Now since he forbids that a man should give to his brother
ne to his freend the myght of his body,	nor to his friend the control of his body,
by a strenger resoun he deffendeth and forbedeth a man to yeven hymself to his enemy.	by a stronger reason he prohibits and forbids a man to give himself to his enemy.
And nathelees I conseille you that ye mystruste nat my lord,	And nevertheless I advise you that you mistrust not my lord,
for I woot wel and knowe verraily that he is debonaire and meeke, large, curteys,	for I know well and know truly that he is gentle and humble, generous, courteous,
and nothyng desirous ne coveitous of good ne richesse.	and in no way desirous nor covetous of goods nor riches.
For ther nys nothyng in this world that he desireth, save oonly worshipe and honour.	For there is nothing in this world that he desires, save only worship and honor.
Forthermoore I knowe wel and am right seur that he shal nothyng doon in this nede withouten my conseil,	Furthermore I know well and am very sure that he shall do nothing in this urgent matter without my advice,
and I shal so werken in this cause that by the grace of oure Lord God	and I shall so work in this cause that by the grace of our Lord God
ye shul been reconsiled unto us."	you shall be reconciled unto us."
Thanne seyden they with o voys, "Worshipful lady, we putten us	Then said they with one voice, "Worshipful lady, we put us
and oure goodes al fully in youre wil and disposicioun,	and our goods all fully in your will and power,
and been redy to comen, what day that it like unto youre noblesse to lymyte us or assigne us,	and are ready to come, what day that it pleases unto your noblesse to limit us or assign us,
for to maken oure obligacioun and boond as strong as it liketh unto youre goodnesse,	to make our pledge and bond as strong as it pleases unto your goodness,
that we mowe fulfille the wille of yow and of my lord Melibee."	that we may fulfill the will of you and of my lord Melibee."
Whan dame Prudence hadde herd the answeres of thise men, she bad hem goon agayn prively;	When dame Prudence had heard the answers of these men, she bad them go again secretly;
and she retourned to hir lord Melibee, and tolde hym how she foond his adversaries ful repentant,	and she returned to her lord Melibee, and told him how she found his adversaries very repentant,
knowelechynge ful lowely hir synnes and trespas, and how they were redy to suffren all peyne,	acknowledging very lowly their sins and trespass, and how they were ready to suffer any punishment,
requirynge and preiynge hym of mercy and pitee.	requesting and praying him of mercy and pity.
Thanne seyde Melibee: "He is wel worthy to have pardoun	Then said Melibee: "He is well worthy to have pardon
and foryifnesse of his synne, that excuseth nat his synne	and forgiveness of his sin, who does not excuse his sin
but knowelecheth it and repenteth hym, axinge indulgence.	but acknowledges it and repents himself, asking indulgence.
For Senec seith, `Ther is the remissioun and foryifnesse, where as the confessioun is,'	For Seneca says, `There is the remission and forgiveness, where the confession is,'
for confessioun is neighebor to innocence.	for confession is neighbor to innocence.
And he seith in another place that `he that hath shame of his synne and knowlecheth	And he says in another place that `he who has shame of his sin and acknowledges
[it is worthy remissioun].' And therfore I assente and conferme me to have pees;	[it is worthy of having remission].' And therefore I assent and resolve myself to have peace;
but it is good that we do it nat withouten the assent and wyl of oure freendes."	but it is good that we do it not without the assent and will of our friends."
Thanne was Prudence right glad and joyeful and seyde:	Then was Prudence very glad and joyful and said:
"Certes, sire," quod she, "ye han wel and goodly answered,	"Certainly, sir," said she, "you have well and goodly answered,
for right as by the conseil, assent, and help of youre freendes	for just as by the advice, assent, and help of your friends
ye han been stired to venge yow and maken werre,	you have been stirred to avenge yourself and make war,
right so withouten hire conseil shul ye nat accorden yow ne have pees with youre adversaries.	just so without their advice shall you not reconcile yourself nor have peace with your adversaries.
For the lawe seith, `Ther nys no thyng so good by wey of kynde as a thyng	For the law says, `There is no thing so good in the natural course of events kind as for a thing
to be unbounde by hym that it was ybounde.'"	to be unbound by him who bound it.'"
And thanne dame Prudence withouten delay or tariynge sente anon hire messages for hire kyn	And then dame Prudence without delay or tarrying sent immediately her messages for her kin
and for hire olde freendes which that were trewe and wyse,	and for her old friends which that were true and wise,
and tolde hem by ordre in the presence of Melibee al this mateere	and told them in detail in the presence of Melibee all this matter
as it is aboven expressed and declared,	as it is above expressed and declared,
and preyden hem that they wolde yeven hire avys and conseil what best were to doon in this nede.	and prayed them that they would give their counsel and advice what best were to do in this urgent matter.
And whan Melibees freendes hadde taken hire avys and deliberacioun of the forseide mateere,	And when Melibee's friends had taken her counsel and deliberation on the foresaid matter,
and hadden examyned it by greet bisynesse and greet diligence,	and had examined it by great effort and greet diligence,
they yave ful conseil for to have pees and reste,	they gave unqualified advice to have peace and rest,
and that Melibee sholde receyve with good herte his adversaries to foryifnesse and mercy.	and that Melibee should with good heart receive his adversaries to forgiveness and mercy.
And whan dame Prudence hadde herd the assent of hir lord Melibee, and the conseil of his freendes	And when dame Prudence had heard the assent of her lord Melibee, and the advice of his friends
accorde with hire wille and hire entencioun,	agree with her will and her intention,
she was wonderly glad in hire herte and seyde:	she was wonderfully glad in her heart and said:
"Ther is an old proverbe," quod she, "seith that `the goodnesse that thou mayst do this day, do it,	"There is an old proverb," said she, "which says that `the goodness that thou can do this day, do it,
and abide nat ne delaye it nat til tomorwe.'	and abide not nor delay it not till tomorrow.'
And therfore I conseille that ye sende youre messages, swiche as been discrete and wise,	And therefore I advise that you send your messengers, such as are discrete and wise,
unto youre adversaries, tellynge hem on youre bihalve	unto your adversaries, telling them on your behalf
that if they wole trete of pees and of accord,	that if they will negotiate about peace and about harmony,
that they shape hem withouten delay or tariyng to comen unto us."	that they prepare themselves without delay or tarrying to come unto us."
Which thyng parfourned was in dede.	Which thing was carried out in deed.
And whanne thise trespassours and repentynge folk of hire folies	And when these trespassers and folk repenting of their follies
-- that is to seyn, the adversaries of Melibee --	-- that is to say, the adversaries of Melibee --
hadden herd what thise messagers seyden unto hem,	had heard what these messengers said unto them,
they weren right glad and joyeful, and answereden ful mekely and benignely,	they were just glad and joyful, and answered very meekly and benignly,
yeldynge graces and thankynges to hir lord Melibee and to al his compaignye,	yielding thanks and gratitude to their lord Melibee and to all his company,
and shopen hem withouten delay to go with the messagers	and prepared themselves without delay to go with the messengers
 and obeye to the comandement of hir lord Melibee.	and obey to the command of their lord Melibee.
And right anon they tooken hire wey to the court of Melibee,	And right away they took their way to the court of Melibee,
and tooken with hem somme of hire trewe freendes	and took with them some of their true friends
to maken feith for hem and for to been hire borwes.	to stand surety for them and to be their guarantors.
And whan they were comen to the presence of Melibee, he seyde hem thise wordes:	And when they were come to the presence of Melibee, he said to them these words:
"It standeth thus," quod Melibee, "and sooth it is, that ye,	"It stands thus," said Melibee, "and true it is, that you,
causelees and withouten skile and resoun,	causeless and without logical explanation and reason,
han doon grete injuries and wronges to me and to my wyf Prudence and to my doghter also.	have done great injuries and wrongs to me and to my wife Prudence and to my daughter also.
For ye han entred into myn hous by violence,	For you have entered into my house by violence,
and have doon swich outrage that alle men knowen wel that ye have disserved the deeth.	and have done such outrage that all men know well that you have deserved the death.
And therfore wol I knowe and wite of yow	And therefore will I know and learn of you
wheither ye wol putte the punyssement and the chastisynge and the vengeance of this outrage in the wyl	whether you will put the punishment and the chastising and the vengeance of this outrage in the power
of me and of my wyf Prudence, or ye wol nat?"	of me and of my wife Prudence, or will you not?"
Thanne the wiseste of hem thre answerde for hem alle and seyde,	Then the wisest of them three answered for them all and said,
"Sire," quod he, "we knowen wel that we been unworthy to comen unto the court	"Sir," said he, "we know well that we are unworthy to come unto the court
of so greet a lord and so worthy as ye been.	of so great a lord and so worthy as you are.
For we han so greetly mystaken us, and han offended	For we have so greatly transgressed, and have offended
and agilt in swich a wise agayn youre heigh lordshipe	and done wrong in such a way against your high lordship
that trewely we han disserved the deeth.	that truly we have deserved the death.
But yet, for the grete goodnesse and debonairetee that al the world witnesseth of youre persone,	But yet, for the great goodness and gentleness that all the world witnesses of your person,
we submytten us to the excellence and benignitee of youre gracious lordshipe,	we submit ourselves to the excellence and benignity of your gracious lordship,
and been redy to obeie to alle youre comandementz,	and are ready to obey all your commandments,
bisekynge yow that of youre merciable pitee	beseeching you that of your merciful pity
 ye wol considere oure grete repentaunce and lowe submyssioun	you will consider our great repentance and low submission
and graunten us foryevenesse of oure outrageous trespas and offense.	and grant us forgiveness of our outrageous trespass and offense.
For wel we knowe that youre liberal grace and mercy	For well we know that your liberal grace and mercy
strecchen hem ferther into goodnesse than doon oure outrageouse giltes and trespas into wikkednesse,	stretch themselves farther into goodness than do our outrageous guilts and trespass into wickedness,
al be it that cursedly and dampnablely we han agilt agayn youre heigh lordshipe."	although it be so that cursedly and damnably we have sinned against your high lordship."
Thanne Melibee took hem up fro the ground ful benignely,	Then Melibee took them up from the ground very benignly,
and receyved hire obligaciouns and hir boondes by hire othes upon hire plegges and borwes,	and received their pledges and their bonds by their oaths upon their pledges and guarantors,
and assigned hem a certeyn day to retourne unto his court	and assigned them a certain day to return unto his court
for to accepte and receyve the sentence and juggement that Melibee wolde comande	to accept and receive the sentence and judgment that Melibee would command
to be doon on hem by the causes aforeseyd.	to be done on them by the causes aforesaid.
Whiche thynges ordeyned, every man retourned to his hous.	Which things arranged, every man returned to his house.
And whan that dame Prudence saugh hir tyme, she freyned and axed hir lord Melibee	And when dame Prudence saw her time, she questioned and asked her lord Melibee
what vengeance he thoughte to taken of his adversaries.	what vengeance he thought to take upon his adversaries.
To which Melibee answerde and seyde, "Certes," quod he, "I thynke and purpose me fully	To which Melibee answered and said, "Certainly," said he, "I think and purpose me fully
to desherite hem of al that evere they han and for to putte hem in exil for evere."	to dispossess them of all that ever they have and to put them in exile for ever."
"Certes," quod dame Prudence, "this were a crueel sentence and muchel agayn resoun.	"Certainly," said dame Prudence, "this would be a cruel sentence and much again reason.
For ye been riche ynough and han no nede of oother mennes good,	For you are rich enough and have no need of other men's wealth,
and ye myghte lightly in this wise gete yow a coveitous name,	and you might easily in this way get yourself a covetous name,
which is a vicious thyng, and oghte been eschued of every good man.	which is a vicious thing, and ought to be shunned by every good man.
For after the sawe of the word of the Apostle, `Coveitise is roote of alle harmes.'	For according to the saying of the word of the Apostle, `Greed is root of all harms.'
And therfore it were bettre for yow to lese so muchel good of youre owene	And therefore it were better for you to lose so much wealth of your own
than for to taken of hir good in this manere,	than to take their wealth in this manner,
for bettre it is to lesen good with worshipe than it is to wynne good with vileynye and shame.	for better it is to lose wealth with honor than it is to acquire wealth with villainy and shame.
And everi man oghte to doon his diligence and his bisynesse to geten hym a good name.	And every man ought to do his best efforts and his main concern to get himself a good name.
And yet shal he nat oonly bisie hym in kepynge of his good name,	And yet shall he not only busy himself in keeping of his good name,
but he shal also enforcen hym alwey to do somthyng by which he may renovelle his good name.	but he shall also strive always to do something by which he may renew his good name.
For it is writen that `the olde good loos or good name of a man is soone goon	For it is written that `the old good reputation or good name of a man is soon gone
and passed, whan it is nat newed ne renovelled.'	and passed, when it is not renewed nor restored.'
And as touchynge that ye seyn ye wole exile youre adversaries,	And as touching that you say you will exile your adversaries,
that thynketh me muchel agayn resoun and out of mesure,	that thinks me much against reason and out of measure,
considered the power that they han yeve yow upon hemself.	considered the power that they have given you upon themselves.
And it is writen that `he is worthy to lesen his privilege that mysuseth	And it is written that `he is worthy to lose his privilege that misuses
the myght and the power that is yeven hym.'	the might and the power that is given him.'
And I sette cas ye myghte enjoyne hem that peyne by right and by lawe,	And I assume (for the sake of argument) you might impose on them that punishment by justice and by law,
which I trowe ye mowe nat do;	which I believe you can not do;
I seye ye mighte nat putten it to execucioun peraventure,	I say perhaps you could not put it to execution,
and thanne were it likly to retourne to the werre as it was biforn.	and then it would be likely to return to the war as it was before.
And therfore, if ye wole that men do yow obeisance, ye moste deemen moore curteisly;	And therefore, if you want men to do you obedience, you must judge more courteously;
this is to seyn, ye moste yeven moore esy sentences and juggementz.	this is to say, you must give more easy sentences and judgments.
For it is writen that `he that moost curteisly comandeth, to hym men moost obeyen.'	For it is written that `he who most courteously commands, to him men most obey.'
And therfore I prey yow that in this necessitee and in this nede	And therefore I pray you that in this necessity and in this urgent matter
ye caste yow to overcome youre herte.	you endeavor to overcome your heart.
For Senec seith that `he that overcometh his herte overcometh twies.'	For Seneca says that `he that overcomes his heart overcomes twice.'
And Tullius seith, `Ther is no thyng so comendable in a greet lord	And Cicero says, `There is no thing so commendable in a great lord
as whan he is debonaire and meeke, and appeseth him lightly.'	as when he is gentle and meek, and calms himself easily.
And I prey yow that ye wole forbere now to do vengeance,	And I pray you that you will forbear now to do vengeance,
in swich a manere that youre goode name may be kept and conserved,	in such a manner that your good name may be kept and conserved,
and that men mowe have cause and mateere to preyse yow of pitee and of mercy,	and that men may have cause and matter to praise you for pity and for mercy,
and that ye have no cause to repente yow of thyng that ye doon.	and that you have no cause to repent yourself of thing that you do.
For Senec seith, `He overcometh in an yvel manere that repenteth hym of his victorie.'	For Seneca says, `He overcomes in an evil manner who repents himself of his victory.'
Wherfore I pray yow, lat mercy been in youre herte,	Wherefore I pray you, let mercy be in your heart,
to th' effect and entente that God Almighty have mercy on yow in his laste juggement.	to the effect and intent that God Almighty have mercy on you in his last judgment.
For Seint Jame seith in his Epistle: `Juggement withouten mercy shal be doon	For Saint James says in his Epistle: `Judgment without mercy shall be done
to hym that hath no mercy of another wight.'"	to him that has no mercy for another person.'"
Whanne Melibee hadde herd the grete skiles and resouns of	When Melibee had heard the great logical arguments and reasons of
dame Prudence, and hire wise informaciouns and techynges,	dame Prudence, and her wise counsels and teachings,
his herte gan enclyne to the wil of his wif, considerynge hir trewe entente,	his heart began to incline to the will of his wife, considering her true intent,
and conformed hym anon and assented fully to werken after hir conseil,	and conformed him immediately and assented fully to work according to her advice,
and thonked God, of whom procedeth al vertu and alle goodnesse,	and thanked God, of whom proceeds all virtue and all goodness,
that hym sente a wyf of so greet discrecioun.	that sent him a wife of so great discretion.
And whan the day cam that his adversaries sholde appieren in his presence,	And when the day came that his adversaries should appear in his presence,
he spak unto hem ful goodly, and seyde in this wyse:	he spoke unto them very goodly, and said in this manner:
"Al be it so that of youre pride and heigh presumpcioun	"Although it be so that of your pride and high presumption
and folie, and of youre necligence and unkonnynge,	and folly, and of your negligence and ignorance,
ye have mysborn yow and trespassed unto me,	you have misbehaved yourself and trespassed unto me,
yet for as muche as I see and biholde youre grete humylitee	yet forasmuch as I see and behold your great humility
and that ye been sory and repentant of youre giltes,	and that you are sorry and repentant of your guilts,
it constreyneth me to doon yow grace and mercy.	it constrains me to do you grace and mercy.
Wherfore I receyve yow to my grace	Wherefore I receive you to my grace
and foryeve yow outrely alle the offenses, injuries, and	and forgive you completely all the offenses, injuries, and
 wronges that ye have doon agayn me and myne,	wrongs that you have done against me and mine,
to this effect and to this ende, that God of his endelees mercy	to this effect and to this end, that God of his endless mercy
wole at the tyme of oure diynge foryeven us oure giltes	will at the time of our dying forgive us our guilts
that we han trespassed to hym in this wrecched world.	that we have trespassed to him in this wretched world.
For doutelees, if we be sory and repentant of the synnes and giltes which we han trespassed	For doubtless, if we are sorry and repentant of the sins and guilts which we have trespassed
in the sighte of oure Lord God,	in the sight of our Lord God,
he is so free and so merciable	he is so free and so merciful
that he wole foryeven us oure giltes	that he will forgive us our guilts
and bryngen us to the blisse that nevere hath ende." Amen.	and bring us to the bliss that never has end." Amen.
Heere is ended Chaucers Tale of Melibee and of Dame Prudence.	Here ends Chaucer's Tale of Melibee and Dame Prudence.
The Prologe of the Frankeleyns Tale	The Prologue of the Franklin's Tale
Thise olde gentil Britouns in hir dayes	These old noble Bretons in their days
Of diverse aventures maden layes,	Of diverse adventures made lays,
Rymeyed in hir firste Briton tonge,	Rhymed in their first Breton tongue,
Whiche layes with hir instrumentz they songe	Which lays with their instruments they sang
Or elles redden hem for hir plesaunce;	Or else read them for their pleasure;
And oon of hem have I in remembraunce,	And one of them have I in remembrance,
Which I shal seyn with good wyl as I kan.	Which I shall say with as good will as I can.
But, sires, by cause I am a burel man,	But, sirs, because I am an unlearned man,
At my bigynnyng first I yow biseche,	At my beginning first I you beseech,
Have me excused of my rude speche.	Have me excused for my rude speech.
I lerned nevere rethorik, certeyn;	I learned never rhetoric, certainly;
Thyng that I speke, it moot be bare and pleyn.	Thing that I speak, it must be bare and plain.
I sleep nevere on the Mount of Pernaso,	I slept never on the Mount of Parnassus,
Ne lerned Marcus Tullius Scithero.	Nor learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.
Colours ne knowe I none, withouten drede,	Colors know I none, without doubt,
But swiche colours as growen in the mede,	But such colors as grow in the field,
Or elles swiche as men dye or peynte.	Or else such as men dye or paint.
Colours of rethoryk been to me queynte;	Colors of rhetoric (figures of speech) are strange to me;
My spirit feeleth noght of swich mateere.	My spirit feels nothing of such matter.
But if yow list, my tale shul ye heere.	But if you wish, you shall hear my tale.
Here bigynneth the Frankeleyns Tale	Here begins the Franklin's Tale.
In Armorik, that called is Britayne,	In Armorica, that is called Brittany,
Ther was a knyght that loved and dide his payne	There was a knight that loved and worked hard
To serve a lady in his beste wise;	To serve a lady in his best manner;
And many a labour, many a greet emprise,	And many a labor, many a great chivalric exploit,
He for his lady wroghte er she were wonne.	He wrought for his lady before she was won.
For she was oon the faireste under sonne,	For she was the fairest of all under the sun,
And eek therto comen of so heigh kynrede	And also moreover come of such noble ancestry
That wel unnethes dorste this knyght, for drede,	That this knight hardly dared, for fear,
Telle hire his wo, his peyne, and his distresse.	Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.
But atte laste she, for his worthynesse,	But at the last she, for his worthiness,
And namely for his meke obeysaunce,	And namely for his meek submission,
Hath swich a pitee caught of his penaunce	Has taken such a pity on his suffering
That pryvely she fil of his accord	That privately she agreed with him
To take hym for hir housbonde and hir lord,	To take him for her husband and hir lord,
Of swich lordshipe as men han over hir wyves.	Of such lordship as men have over their wives.
And for to lede the moore in blisse hir lyves,	And to lead the more blissfully their lives,
Of his free wyl he swoor hire as a knyght	Of his free will he swore her as a knight
That nevere in al his lyf he, day ne nyght,	That never in all his life he, day or night,
Ne sholde upon hym take no maistrie	Should take upon himself any mastery
Agayn hir wyl, ne kithe hire jalousie,	Against her will, nor show her jealousy,
But hire obeye, and folwe hir wyl in al,	But obey her, and follow her will in everything,
As any lovere to his lady shal,	As any lover to his lady should,
Save that the name of soveraynetee,	Except for the appearance of sovereignty,
That wolde he have for shame of his degree.	Which he would have to avoid bringing shame on his status (of knighthood).
She thanked hym, and with ful greet humblesse	She thanked him, and with full great humbleness
She seyde, "Sire, sith of youre gentillesse	She said, "Sir, since of your nobility
Ye profre me to have so large a reyne,	You offer me to have such freedom from restraint,
Ne wolde nevere God bitwixe us tweyne,	And would God that never between us two,
As in my gilt, were outher werre or stryf.	Through my fault, should be either war or strife.
Sire, I wol be youre humble trewe wyf --	Sir, I will be your humble true wife --
Have heer my trouthe -- til that myn herte breste."	Have here my pledge -- until my heart bursts (until I die)."
Thus been they bothe in quiete and in reste.	Thus are they both in quiet and in peace.
For o thyng, sires, saufly dar I seye,	For one thing, sirs, I dare say confidently,
That freendes everych oother moot obeye,	That friends must obey each other,
If they wol longe holden compaignye.	If they will long hold company.
Love wol nat been constreyned by maistrye.	Love will not be constrained by mastery.
Whan maistrie comth, the God of Love anon	When mastery comes, the God of Love immediately
Beteth his wynges, and farewel, he is gon!	Beats his wings, and farewell, he is gone!
Love is a thyng as any spirit free.	Love is a thing free as any spirit.
Wommen, of kynde, desiren libertee,	Women, by nature, desire liberty,
And nat to been constreyned as a thral;	And not to be constrained like a slave;
And so doon men, if I sooth seyen shal.	And so do men, if I shall say the truth.
Looke who that is moost pacient in love,	Look who is most patient in love,
He is at his avantage al above.	He is in the best position, superior to all.
Pacience is an heigh vertu, certeyn,	Patience is a noble virtue, certainly,
For it venquysseth, as thise clerkes seyn,	For it vanquishes, as these clerks say,
Thynges that rigour sholde nevere atteyne.	Things that rigor should never attain.
For every word men may nat chide or pleyne.	One may not chide or complain for every word.
Lerneth to suffre, or elles, so moot I goon,	Learn to suffer, or else, as I may walk (I swear),
Ye shul it lerne, wher so ye wole or noon;	You shall learn it, whether you want to or not;
For in this world, certein, ther no wight is	For in this world, certainly, there is no person
That he ne dooth or seith somtyme amys.	Who does not sometime do or speak amiss.
Ire, siknesse, or constellacioun,	Ire, sickness, or the position of the stars,
Wyn, wo, or chaungynge of complexioun	Wine, woe, or changing of the balance of bodily humors
Causeth ful ofte to doon amys or speken.	Causes (one) very often to do or speak amiss.
On every wrong a man may nat be wreken.	On every wrong a man can not be avenged.
After the tyme moste be temperaunce	There must be moderation suitable to the occasion
To every wight that kan on governaunce.	By every person who knows about governance.
And therfore hath this wise, worthy knyght,	And therefore has this wise, worthy knight,
To lyve in ese, suffrance hire bihight,	To live in ease, promised her forbearance,
And she to hym ful wisly gan to swere	And she to him full truly did swear
That nevere sholde ther be defaute in here.	That never should there be fault in her.
Heere may men seen an humble, wys accord;	Here may men see a humble, wise accord;
Thus hath she take hir servant and hir lord --	Thus has she taken her servant and her lord --
Servant in love, and lord in mariage.	Servant in love, and lord in marriage.
Thanne was he bothe in lordshipe and servage.	Then was he both in lordship and servitude.
Servage? Nay, but in lordshipe above,	Servitude? Nay, but in lordship above,
Sith he hath bothe his lady and his love;	Since he has both his lady and his love;
His lady, certes, and his wyf also,	His lady, certainly, and his wife also,
The which that lawe of love acordeth to.	The which accords to the law of love.
And whan he was in this prosperitee,	And when he was in this happy state,
Hoom with his wyf he gooth to his contree,	Home with his wife he goes to his country,
Nat fer fro Pedmark, ther his dwellyng was,	Not far from Pedmark, where his dwelling was,
Where as he lyveth in blisse and in solas.	Where he lives in bliss and in pleasure.
Who koude telle, but he hadde wedded be,	Who could tell, unless he had been wedded,
The joye, the ese, and the prosperitee	The joy, the ease, and the happiness
That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf?	That is between a husband and his wife?
A yeer and moore lasted this blisful lyf,	A year and more lasted this blissful life,
Til that the knyght of which I speke of thus,	Until the knight of whom I thus speak,
That of Kayrrud was cleped Arveragus,	That was called Arveragus of Kayrrud,
Shoop hym to goon and dwelle a yeer or tweyne	Prepared himself to go and dwell a year or two
In Engelond, that cleped was eek Briteyne,	In England, which was also called Britain,
To seke in armes worshipe and honour --	To seek in arms good reputation and honor --
For al his lust he sette in swich labour --	For he set all his desire in such labor --
And dwelled there two yeer; the book seith thus.	And dwelled there two years; the book says thus.
Now wol I stynten of this Arveragus,	Now will I stop (speaking) of this Arveragus,
And speken I wole of Dorigen his wyf,	And I will speak of Dorigen his wife,
That loveth hire housbonde as hire hertes lyf.	Who loves her husband as her heart's life.
For his absence wepeth she and siketh,	For his absence she weeps and sighs,
As doon thise noble wyves whan hem liketh.	As do these noble wives when it pleases them.
She moorneth, waketh, wayleth, fasteth, pleyneth;	She mourns, stays awake, wails, fasts, complains;
Desir of his presence hire so destreyneth	Desire of his presence so presses upon her
That al this wyde world she sette at noght.	That all this wide world she reckoned as worth nothing.
Hire freendes, whiche that knewe hir hevy thoght,	Her friends, who knew her gloomy thought,
Conforten hire in al that ever they may.	Comfort her in all that ever they can.
They prechen hire, they telle hire nyght and day	They preach to her, they tell her night and day
That causelees she sleeth hirself, allas!	That she slays herself without cause, alas!
And every confort possible in this cas	And every comfort possible in this case
They doon to hire with al hire bisynesse,	They do to her with all their concern,
Al for to make hire leve hire hevynesse.	All to make her leave her sadness.
By proces, as ye knowen everichoon,	In the course of time, as every one of you knows,
Men may so longe graven in a stoon	One may so long engrave on a stone
Til som figure therinne emprented be.	Until some figure is imprinted upon it.
So longe han they conforted hire til she	So long have they comforted her until she
Receyved hath, by hope and by resoun,	Received has, by hope and by reason,
The emprentyng of hire consolacioun,	The imprint of their consolation,
Thurgh which hir grete sorwe gan aswage;	Through which her great sorrow began to be relieved;
She may nat alwey duren in swich rage.	She can not always continue in such passionate grief.
And eek Arveragus, in al this care,	And also Arveragus, in (the midst of) all this care,
Hath sent hire lettres hoom of his welfare,	Has sent her letters home (telling) of his welfare,
And that he wol come hastily agayn;	And that he will come hastily again;
Or elles hadde this sorwe hir herte slayn.	Or else this sorrow would have slain her heart.
Hire freendes sawe hir sorwe gan to slake	Her friends saw her sorrow began to slacken
And preyde hire on knees, for Goddes sake,	And prayed her on their knees, for God's sake,
To come and romen hire in compaignye,	To come and walk about in company,
Awey to dryve hire derke fantasye.	Away to drive her dark imagining.
And finally she graunted that requeste,	And finally she granted that request,
For wel she saugh that it was for the beste.	For well she saw that it was for the best.
Now stood hire castel faste by the see,	Now her castle stood close by the sea,
And often with hire freendes walketh shee	And often with her friends she walks
Hire to disporte upon the bank an heigh,	To amuse herself upon the bank on high,
Where as she many a ship and barge seigh	Where she saw many a ship and sailing vessel
Seillynge hir cours, where as hem liste go.	Sailing their course, where it pleases them to go.
But thanne was that a parcel of hire wo,	But then was that a portion of her woe,
For to hirself ful ofte, "Allas!" seith she,	For to herself full often, she says "Alas!",
"Is ther no ship, of so manye as I se,	"Is there no ship, of so many as I see,
Wol bryngen hom my lord? Thanne were myn herte	Will bring home my lord? Then would my heart be
Al warisshed of his bittre peynes smerte."	All cured of its bitter, sharp pains."
Another tyme ther wolde she sitte and thynke,	Another time there would she sit and think,
And caste hir eyen dounward fro the brynke.	And cast her eyes downward from the brink.
But whan she saugh the grisly rokkes blake,	But when she saw the grisly black rocks,
For verray feere so wolde hir herte quake	For sheer fear her heart would so quake
That on hire feet she myghte hire noght sustene.	That on her feet she could not sustain herself.
Thanne wolde she sitte adoun upon the grene,	Then would she sit down upon the green,
And pitously into the see biholde,	And piteously stare into the sea,
And seyn right thus, with sorweful sikes colde:	And say right thus, with sorrowful, cold sighs:
"Eterne God, that thurgh thy purveiaunce	"Eternal God, who through thy foreknowledge
Ledest the world by certein governaunce,	Leads the world by sure governance,
In ydel, as men seyn, ye no thyng make.	Men say you make nothing in vain.
But, Lord, thise grisly feendly rokkes blake,	But, Lord, these grisly fiendish black rocks,
That semen rather a foul confusion	That seem rather a foul confusion
Of werk than any fair creacion	Of work than any fair creation
Of swich a parfit wys God and a stable,	Of such a perfectly wise and stable God,
Why han ye wroght this werk unresonable?	Why have you created this unreasonable work?
For by this werk, south, north, ne west, ne eest,	For by this work, south, north, nor west, nor east,
Ther nys yfostred man, ne bryd, ne beest;	There is no benefit to man, nor bird, nor beast;
It dooth no good, to my wit, but anoyeth.	It does no good, to my understanding, but does harm.
Se ye nat, Lord, how mankynde it destroyeth?	See you not, Lord, how it destroys mankind?
An hundred thousand bodyes of mankynde	A hundred thousand bodies of mankind
Han rokkes slayn, al be they nat in mynde,	Have rocks slain, although their names are forgotten,
Which mankynde is so fair part of thy werk	And this mankind is so fair a part of thy work
That thou it madest lyk to thyn owene merk.	That thou made it like to thine own image.
Thanne semed it ye hadde a greet chiertee	Then it seemed you had a great love
Toward mankynde; but how thanne may it bee	Toward mankind; but how then may it be
That ye swiche meenes make it to destroyen,	That you make such means to destroy it,
Whiche meenes do no good, but evere anoyen?	Which means do no good, but always cause trouble?
I woot wel clerkes wol seyn as hem leste,	I know well clerks will say as they please,
By argumentz, that al is for the beste,	By logical reasoning, that all is for the best,
Though I ne kan the causes nat yknowe.	Though I can not know the causes.
But thilke God that made wynd to blowe	But that same God that made wind to blow
As kepe my lord! This my conclusion.	Keep my lord! This is my conclusion.
To clerkes lete I al disputison.	To clerks I leave all disputation.
But wolde God that alle thise rokkes blake	But would God that all these black rocks
Were sonken into helle for his sake!	Were sunk into hell for his sake!
Thise rokkes sleen myn herte for the feere."	These rocks slay my heart for fear."
Thus wolde she seyn, with many a pitous teere.	Thus would she say, with many a piteous tear.
Hire freendes sawe that it was no disport	Her friends saw that it was no pleasure
To romen by the see, but disconfort,	To roam by the sea, but discomfort,
And shopen for to pleyen somwher elles.	And decide to amuse themselves somewhere else.
They leden hire by ryveres and by welles,	They lead her by rivers and by springs,
And eek in othere places delitables;	And also in other delightful places;
They dauncen and they pleyen at ches and tables.	They dance and they play at chess and backgammon.
So on a day, right in the morwe-tyde,	So on a day, early in the morning-tide,
Unto a gardyn that was ther bisyde,	Unto a garden that was there nearby,
In which that they hadde maad hir ordinaunce	In which they had made their arrangement
Of vitaille and of oother purveiaunce,	For victuals and for other provisions,
They goon and pleye hem al the longe day.	They go and amuse themselves all the long day.
And this was on the sixte morwe of May,	And this was on the sixth morning of May,
Which May hadde peynted with his softe shoures	Which May had painted with its soft showers
This gardyn ful of leves and of floures;	This garden full of leaves and of flowers;
And craft of mannes hand so curiously	And craft of man's hand so skillfully
Arrayed hadde this gardyn, trewely,	Had adorned this garden, truly,
That nevere was ther gardyn of swich prys	That never was there garden of such worth
But if it were the verray paradys.	Unless it were the true paradise.
The odour of floures and the fresshe sighte	The odor of flowers and the fresh sight
Wolde han maked any herte lighte	Would have made any heart light
That evere was born, but if to greet siknesse	That ever was born, unless too great sickness
Or to greet sorwe helde it in distresse,	Or too great sorrow held it in distress,
So ful it was of beautee with plesaunce.	It was so full of beauty with pleasure.
At after-dyner gonne they to daunce,	After dinner they go to dance,
And synge also, save Dorigen allone,	And sing also, save Dorigen alone,
Which made alwey hir compleint and hir moone,	Who made always her complaint and her moan,
For she ne saugh hym on the daunce go	For she did not see him on the dance go
That was hir housbonde and hir love also.	Who was her husband and her love also.
But nathelees she moste a tyme abyde	But nonetheless she must a time abide
And with good hope lete hir sorwe slyde.	And with good hope let her sorrow slip away.
Upon this daunce, amonges othere men,	In this dance, among other men,
Daunced a squier biforn Dorigen,	Danced a squire before Dorigen,
That fressher was and jolyer of array,	Who was more lively and more gaily dressed,
As to my doom, than is the month of May.	As to my judgement, than is the month of May.
He syngeth, daunceth, passynge any man	He sings, dances, passing any man
That is, or was, sith that the world bigan.	That is, or was, since the world began.
Therwith he was, if men sholde hym discryve,	Therewith he was, if one should him describe,
Oon of the beste farynge man on lyve;	One of the most handsome men alive;
Yong, strong, right vertuous, and riche, and wys,	Young, strong, very valiant, and rich, and wise,
And wel biloved, and holden in greet prys.	And well beloved, and held in great esteem.
And shortly, if the sothe I tellen shal,	And shortly, if I shall tell the truth,
Unwityng of this Dorigen at al,	Unknown by this Dorigen at all,
This lusty squier, servant to Venus,	This lusty squire, servant to Venus,
Which that ycleped was Aurelius,	Who was called Aurelius,
Hadde loved hire best of any creature	Had loved her best of any creature
Two yeer and moore, as was his aventure,	Two years and more, as was his fate,
But nevere dorste he tellen hire his grevaunce.	But he never dared tell her his grievance.
Withouten coppe he drank al his penaunce.	Copiously he drank all his penance (suffered intensely).
He was despeyred; no thyng dorste he seye,	He was in despair; he dared say nothing,
Save in his songes somwhat wolde he wreye	Except in his songs somewhat he would reveal
His wo, as in a general compleynyng;	His woe, as in a general lament;
He seyde he lovede and was biloved no thyng.	He said he loved and was in no way loved in return
Of swich matere made he manye layes,	Of such subject matter made he many lays,
Songes, compleintes, roundels, virelayes,	Songs, complaints, roundels, virelays,
How that he dorste nat his sorwe telle,	(Saying) how he dared not his sorrow tell,
But langwissheth as a furye dooth in helle;	But suffers as a fury does in hell;
And dye he moste, he seyde, as dide Ekko	And he must die, he said, as did Echo
For Narcisus, that dorste nat telle hir wo.	For Narcissus, she who dared not tell her woe.
In oother manere than ye heere me seye,	In other ways than you hear me say,
Ne dorste he nat to hire his wo biwreye,	He dared not reveal to her his woe,
Save that, paraventure, somtyme at daunces,	Except that, by chance, sometimes at dances,
Ther yonge folk kepen hir observaunces,	Where young folk observe their customs (of courtship),
It may wel be he looked on hir face	It may well be he looked on her face
In swich a wise as man that asketh grace;	In such a manner as a man that asks for grace;
But nothyng wiste she of his entente.	But she knew nothing of his intent.
Nathelees it happed, er they thennes wente,	Nonetheless it happened, before they went away,
By cause that he was hire neighebour,	Because he was her neighbor,
And was a man of worshipe and honour,	And was a man of good reputation and honor,
And hadde yknowen hym of tyme yoore,	And (she) had known him for a long time,
They fille in speche; and forth, moore and moore,	They fell in speech; and forth, more and more,
Unto his purpos drough Aurelius,	Unto his purpose drew Aurelius,
And whan he saugh his tyme, he seyde thus:	And when he saw his time, he said thus:
"Madame," quod he, "by God that this world made,	"Madame," he said, "by God that this world made,
So that I wiste it myghte youre herte glade,	Providing that I knew it might gladden your heart,
I wolde that day that youre Arveragus	I wish that day that your Arveragus
Wente over the see, that I, Aurelius,	Went over the sea, that I, Aurelius,
Hadde went ther nevere I sholde have come agayn.	Had went from where I should never have come back.
For wel I woot my servyce is in vayn;	For well I know my service is in vain;
My gerdon is but brestyng of myn herte.	My reward is but the breaking of my heart.
Madame, reweth upon my peynes smerte;	Madame, have pity upon my bitter pains;
For with a word ye may me sleen or save.	For with one word you may me slay or save.
Heere at youre feet God wolde that I were grave!	Here at your feet would God that I were buried!
I ne have as now no leyser moore to seye;	I have now no opportunity to say more;
Have mercy, sweete, or ye wol do me deye!"	Have mercy, sweet, or you will make me die!"
She gan to looke upon Aurelius;	She did look upon Aurelius;
"Is this youre wyl," quod she, "and sey ye thus?	"Is this your desire," said she, "and say you thus?
Nevere erst," quod she, "ne wiste I what ye mente.	Never before," she said, "Did I know what you meant.
But now, Aurelie, I knowe youre entente,	But now, Aurelius, I know your intention,
By thilke God that yaf me soule and lyf,	By that same God that gave me soul and life,
Ne shal I nevere been untrewe wyf	I shall never be an untrue wife
In word ne werk, as fer as I have wit;	In word nor deed, so long as I have my wits;
I wol been his to whom that I am knyt.	I will be his to whom that I am knit.
Taak this for fynal answere as of me."	Take this for my final answer."
But after that in pley thus seyde she:	But after that in play thus she said:
"Aurelie," quod she, "by heighe God above,	"Aurelius," she said, "by high God above,
Yet wolde I graunte yow to been youre love,	Yet would I grant you to be your love,
Syn I yow se so pitously complayne.	Since I see you so piteously lament.
Looke what day that endelong Britayne	On whatever day that from end to end of Brittany
Ye remoeve alle the rokkes, stoon by stoon,	You remove all the rocks, stone by stone,
That they ne lette ship ne boot to goon --	So that they do not prevent ship nor boat to go --
I seye, whan ye han maad the coost so clene	I say, when you have made the coast so clean
Of rokkes that ther nys no stoon ysene,	Of rocks that there is no stone seen,
Thanne wol I love yow best of any man;	Then will I love you best of any man;
Have heer my trouthe, in al that evere I kan."	Have here my pledged word, in all that is in my power."
"Is ther noon oother grace in yow?" quod he.	"Is there no other grace in you?" he said.
"No, by that Lord," quod she, "that maked me!	"No, by that Lord," she said, "that made me!
For wel I woot that it shal never bityde.	For well I know that it shall never happen.
Lat swiche folies out of youre herte slyde.	Let such follies pass out of your heart.
What deyntee sholde a man han in his lyf	What pleasure should a man have in his life
For to go love another mannes wyf,	To go love another man's wife,
That hath hir body whan so that hym liketh?"	Who has her body whenever he pleases?"
Aurelius ful ofte soore siketh;	Aurelius very often bitterly sighs;
Wo was Aurelie whan that he this herde,	Woe was Aurelius when he heard this,
And with a sorweful herte he thus answerde:	And with a sorrowful heart he thus answered:
"Madame," quod he, "this were an inpossible!	"Madame," he said, "this would be an impossiblity!
Thanne moot I dye of sodeyn deth horrible."	Then I must die of sudden horrible death."
And with that word he turned hym anon.	And with that word he turned away immediately.
Tho coome hir othere freendes many oon,	Then came her other friends many a one,
And in the aleyes romeden up and doun,	And in the garden paths roamed up and down,
And nothyng wiste of this conclusioun,	And knew nothing of this business,
But sodeynly bigonne revel newe	But suddenly began to revel anew
Til that the brighte sonne loste his hewe;	Until the bright sun lost its hue;
For th' orisonte hath reft the sonne his lyght --	For the horizon has bereft the sun of its light --
This is as muche to seye as it was nyght --	This is as much to say that it was night --
And hoom they goon in joye and in solas,	And home they go in joy and in pleasure,
Save oonly wrecche Aurelius, allas!	Save only wretched Aurelius, alas!
He to his hous is goon with sorweful herte.	He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart.
He seeth he may nat fro his deeth asterte;	He sees he can not escape from his death;
Hym semed that he felte his herte colde.	He thought that he felt his heart grow cold.
Up to the hevene his handes he gan holde,	Up to the heaven his hands he did hold,
And on his knowes bare he sette hym doun,	And on his bare knees he set himself down,
And in his ravyng seyde his orisoun.	And in his delirium said his prayer.
For verray wo out of his wit he breyde.	For utter woe out of his wits he suddenly went.
He nyste what he spak, but thus he seyde;	He knew not what he spoke, but thus he said;
With pitous herte his pleynt hath he bigonne	With piteous heart he has begun his complaint
Unto the goddes, and first unto the sonne:	Unto the gods, and first unto the sun:
He seyde, "Appollo, god and governour	He said, "Apollo, god and governor
Of every plaunte, herbe, tree, and flour,	Of every plant, herb, tree, and flower,
That yevest, after thy declinacion,	That gives, according to thy height (in the sky),
To ech of hem his tyme and his seson,	To each of them its time and its season,
As thyn herberwe chaungeth lowe or heighe,	As thy astronomical position changes low or high,
Lord Phebus, cast thy merciable eighe	Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciful eye
On wrecche Aurelie, which that am but lorn.	On wretched Aurelius, who is as good as lost.
Lo, lord! My lady hath my deeth ysworn	Lo, lord! My lady has sworn my death
Withoute gilt, but thy benignytee	Without guilt, unless thy kindness
Upon my dedly herte have som pitee.	Upon my dying heart have some pity.
For wel I woot, lord Phebus, if yow lest,	For well I know, lord Phoebus, if you wish,
Ye may me helpen, save my lady, best.	You can help me best (of anyone), except for my lady.
Now voucheth sauf that I may yow devyse	Now grant that I may tell you
How that I may been holpen and in what wyse.	How I may be helped and in what manner.
"Youre blisful suster, Lucina the sheene,	"Your blissful sister, Lucina the bright,
That of the see is chief goddesse and queene	Who of the sea is chief goddess and queen
(Though Neptunus have deitee in the see,	(Though Neptune have godly dominion in the sea,
Yet emperisse aboven hym is she),	Yet empress above him is she),
Ye knowen wel, lord, that right as hir desir	You know well, lord, that just as her desire
Is to be quyked and lighted of youre fir,	Is to be kindled and ignited by your fire,
For which she folweth yow ful bisily,	For which she follows you very attentively,
Right so the see desireth naturelly	Just so the sea desires naturally
To folwen hire, as she that is goddesse	To follow her, as she that is goddess
Bothe in the see and ryveres moore and lesse.	Both in the sea and rivers great and small.
Wherfore, lord Phebus, this is my requeste --	Wherefore, lord Phoebus, this is my request --
Do this miracle, or do myn herte breste --	Do this miracle, or make my heart break --
That now next at this opposicion	That now at this next opposition (of the sun and moon)
Which in the signe shal be of the Leon,	Which shall be in the sign of the Lion,
As preieth hire so greet a flood to brynge	Pray her so great a high tide to bring
That fyve fadme at the leeste it oversprynge	That five fathoms at the least it rise above
The hyeste rokke in Armorik Briteyne;	The highest rock in Armorican Brittany;
And lat this flood endure yeres tweyne.	And let this flood-tide endure for two years.
Thanne certes to my lady may I seye,	Then certainly to my lady may I say,
`Holdeth youre heste, the rokkes been aweye.'	`Keep your promise, the rocks are away.'
"Lord Phebus, dooth this miracle for me.	"Lord Phoebus, do this miracle for me.
Preye hire she go no faster cours than ye;	Pray her that she go at no faster speed as you;
I seye, preyeth your suster that she go	I say, pray your sister that she go
No faster cours than ye thise yeres two.	At no faster speed as you for these two years.
Thanne shal she been evene atte fulle alway,	Then shall she be fully even with you always,
And spryng flood laste bothe nyght and day.	And spring flood will last both night and day.
And but she vouche sauf in swich manere	And unless she agree in such manner
To graunte me my sovereyn lady deere,	To grant me my sovereign lady dear,
Prey hire to synken every rok adoun	Pray her to sink every rock down
Into hir owene dirke regioun	Into her own dark region
Under the ground, ther Pluto dwelleth inne,	Under the ground, in which Pluto dwells,
Or nevere mo shal I my lady wynne.	Or never more shall I win my lady.
Thy temple in Delphos wol I barefoot seke.	Thy temple in Delphi I will barefoot seek.
Lord Phebus, se the teeris on my cheke,	Lord Phoebus, see the tears on my cheek,
And of my peyne have som compassioun."	And on my pain have some compassion."
And with that word in swowne he fil adoun,	And with that word he fell down in a faint,
And longe tyme he lay forth in a traunce.	And for a long time he lay in a trance.
His brother, which that knew of his penaunce,	His brother, who knew of his suffering,
Up caughte hym and to bedde he hath hym broght.	Caught him up and to bed he has him brought.
Dispeyred in this torment and this thoght	Despaired in this torment and this thought
Lete I this woful creature lye;	I leave this woeful creature lying;
Chese he, for me, wheither he wol lyve or dye.	Let him choose, for all I care, whether he will live or die.
Arveragus, with heele and greet honour,	Arveragus, with well-being and great honor,
As he that was of chivalrie the flour,	As he that was of chivalry the flower,
Is comen hoom, and othere worthy men.	Is come home, and other worthy men.
O blisful artow now, thou Dorigen,	O blissful art thou now, thou Dorigen,
That hast thy lusty housbonde in thyne armes,	That hast thy lusty husband in thine arms,
The fresshe knyght, the worthy man of armes,	The vigorous knight, the worthy man of arms,
That loveth thee as his owene hertes lyf.	That loves thee as his own heart's life.
No thyng list hym to been ymaginatyf,	He not at all desired to be suspicious,
If any wight hadde spoke, whil he was oute,	If any person had spoken, while he was away,
To hire of love; he hadde of it no doute.	To her of love; he had of it no fear.
He noght entendeth to no swich mateere,	He pays no attention to any such matter,
But daunceth, justeth, maketh hire good cheere;	But dances, jousts, makes her good cheer;
And thus in joye and blisse I lete hem dwelle,	And thus in joy and bliss I let them dwell,
And of the sike Aurelius wol I telle.	And of the sick Aurelius I will tell.
In langour and in torment furyus	In suffering and in hellish torment
Two yeer and moore lay wrecche Aurelyus,	Two years and more lay wretched Aurelius,
Er any foot he myghte on erthe gon;	Before he could set a foot on the ground;
Ne confort in this tyme hadde he noon,	Nor had he any comfort in this time,
Save of his brother, which that was a clerk.	Except from his brother, who was a clerk.
He knew of al this wo and al this werk,	He knew of all this woe and all this suffering,
For to noon oother creature, certeyn,	For to no other creature, certainly,
Of this matere he dorste no word seyn.	He dared say any word of this matter.
Under his brest he baar it moore secree	Under his breast he bore it more secretly
Than evere dide Pamphilus for Galathee.	Than ever did Pamphilus for Galathee.
His brest was hool, withoute for to sene,	His breast was unhurt, in outward appearance,
But in his herte ay was the arwe kene.	But in his heart ever was the sharp arrow.
And wel ye knowe that of a sursanure	And well you know that for a wound healed only on the surface
In surgerye is perilous the cure,	In surgery the treatment is perilous,
But men myghte touche the arwe or come therby.	Unless one could touch the arrow or grasp it.
His brother weep and wayled pryvely,	His brother wept and wailed secretly,
Til atte laste hym fil in remembraunce,	Until at the last he remembered,
That whiles he was at Orliens in Fraunce --	That while he was at Orleans in France --
As yonge clerkes that been lykerous	As young clerks that are eager
To reden artes that been curious	To read arts that are arcane
Seken in every halke and every herne	Seek in every nook and every cranny
Particuler sciences for to lerne --	To learn specialized branches of learning --
He hym remembred that, upon a day,	He remembered that, one day,
At Orliens in studie a book he say	At Orleans in a study hall he saw a book
Of magyk natureel, which his felawe,	Of natural science, which his fellow,
That was that tyme a bacheler of lawe,	Who was at that time a bachelor of law,
Al were he ther to lerne another craft,	Although he was there to learn another craft,
Hadde prively upon his desk ylaft;	Had covertly left upon his desk;
Which book spak muchel of the operaciouns	Which book spoke much of the operations
Touchynge the eighte and twenty mansiouns	Concerning the eight and twenty stations
That longen to the moone, and swich folye	That belong to the moon, and such folly
As in oure dayes is nat worth a flye --	As in our days is not worth a fly --
For hooly chirches feith in oure bileve	For holy church's faith in our belief
Ne suffreth noon illusioun us to greve.	Does not allow any illusion to grieve us.
And whan this book was in his remembraunce,	And when this book was in his remembrance,
Anon for joye his herte gan to daunce,	Straightway for joy his heart began to dance,
And to hymself he seyde pryvely:	And to himself he said secretly,
"My brother shal be warisshed hastily;	"My brother shall be cured speedily;
For I am siker that ther be sciences	For I am sure that there are sciences
By whiche men make diverse apparences,	By which men make diverse illusions,
Swiche as thise subtile tregetoures pleye.	Such as these subtle illusionists play.
For ofte at feestes have I wel herd seye	For often at feasts have I well heard say
That tregetours withinne an halle large	That illusionists within a large hall
Have maad come in a water and a barge,	Have made come in a water and a barge,
And in the halle rowen up and doun.	And in the hall row up and down.
Somtyme hath semed come a grym leoun;	Sometimes a grim lion has seemed to come;
And somtyme floures sprynge as in a mede;	And sometimes flowers spring as in a field;
Somtyme a vyne, and grapes white and rede;	Sometimes a vine, and grapes white and red;
Somtyme a castel, al of lym and stoon;	Sometimes a castle, all of mortar and stone;
And whan hem lyked, voyded it anon.	And when they pleased, they made it suddenly disappear.
Thus semed it to every mannes sighte.	Thus it seemed to every man's sight.
"Now thanne conclude I thus: that if I myghte	"Now then conclude I thus: that if I might
At Orliens som oold felawe yfynde	At Orleans find some old fellow
That hadde thise moones mansions in mynde,	Who had these moon's stations in mind,
Or oother magyk natureel above,	Or other natural science beyond that
He sholde wel make my brother han his love.	He should well make my brother have his love.
For with an apparence a clerk may make,	For with an apparition a clerk may make it seem,
To mannes sighte, that alle the rokkes blake	To man's sight, that all the rocks black
Of Britaigne weren yvoyded everichon,	Of Brittany were removed every one,
And shippes by the brynke comen and gon,	And ships by the shore come and go,
And in swich forme enduren a wowke or two.	And in such form endure a week or two.
Thanne were my brother warisshed of his wo;	Then my brother would be cured of his woe;
Thanne moste she nedes holden hire biheste,	Then must she by necessity keep her promise,
Or elles he shal shame hire atte leeste."	Or else he shall shame her at the least."
What sholde I make a lenger tale of this?	Why should I make a longer tale of this?
Unto his brotheres bed he comen is,	Unto his brother's bed he is come,
And swich confort he yaf hym for to gon	And such encouragement he gave him to go
To Orliens that he up stirte anon,	To Orleans that he leaped up immediately,
And on his wey forthward thanne is he fare	And on his way forth then is he gone
In hope for to been lissed of his care.	In hope to be relieved of his care.
Whan they were come almoost to that citee,	When they had come almost to that city,
But if it were a two furlong or thre,	Not more than two or three furlongs,
A yong clerk romynge by hymself they mette,	A young clerk roaming by himself they met,
Which that in Latyn thriftily hem grette,	Who in Latin politely greeted them,
And after that he seyde a wonder thyng:	And after that he said a wonderful thing:
"I knowe," quod he, "the cause of youre comyng."	"I know," he said, "the cause of your coming."
And er they ferther any foote wente,	And before they went any foot farther,
He tolde hem al that was in hire entente.	He told them all that was in their intention.
This Briton clerk hym asked of felawes	This Breton clerk asked him about fellows
The whiche that he had knowe in olde dawes,	Whom he had known in old days,
And he answerde hym that they dede were,	And he answered him that they were dead,
For which he weep ful ofte many a teere.	For which he wept very often many a tear.
Doun of his hors Aurelius lighte anon,	Down off his horse Aurelius alighted straightway,
And with this magicien forth is he gon	And with this magician forth he is gone
Hoom to his hous, and maden hem wel at ese.	Home to his house, and put them well at ease.
Hem lakked no vitaille that myghte hem plese.	They lacked no foods that might please them.
So wel arrayed hous as ther was oon	So well appointed a house as this one was
Aurelius in his lyf saugh nevere noon.	Aurelius in his life saw never a one.
He shewed hym, er he wente to sopeer,	He showed him, before he went to supper,
Forestes, parkes ful of wilde deer;	Forests, parks full of wild deer;
Ther saugh he hertes with hir hornes hye,	There he saw harts with their high horns,
The gretteste that evere were seyn with ye.	The greatest that ever were seen with eye.
He saugh of hem an hondred slayn with houndes,	He saw a hundred of them slain by hounds,
And somme with arwes blede of bittre woundes.	And some bled because of bitter wounds from arrows.
He saugh, whan voyded were thise wilde deer,	He saw, when these wild deer were removed,
Thise fauconers upon a fair ryver,	These hunters with falcons upon a fair riverbank,
That with hir haukes han the heron slayn.	That with their hawks have slain the heron.
Tho saugh he knyghtes justyng in a playn;	Then he saw knights jousting in a plain;
And after this he dide hym swich plesaunce	And after this he provided him such pleasure
That he hym shewed his lady on a daunce,	That he showed him his lady in a dance,
On which hymself he daunced, as hym thoughte.	In which he himself danced, as he thought.
And whan this maister that this magyk wroughte	And when this master that wrought this magic
Saugh it was tyme, he clapte his handes two,	Saw it was time, he clapped his two hands,
And farewel! Al oure revel was ago.	And farewell! All our revel was gone.
And yet remoeved they nevere out of the hous,	And yet moved they never out of the house,
Whil they saugh al this sighte merveillous,	While they saw all this marvelous sight,
But in his studie, ther as his bookes be,	But in his study, where his books are,
They seten stille, and no wight but they thre.	They sat still, and no person (was there) but these three.
To hym this maister called his squier,	This master called his squire to him,
And seyde hym thus: "Is redy oure soper?	And said to him thus: "Is our supper ready?
Almoost an houre it is, I undertake,	Almost an hour it is, I declare,
Sith I yow bad oure soper for to make,	Since I ordered you to make our supper,
Whan that thise worthy men wenten with me	When these worthy men went with me
Into my studie, ther as my bookes be."	Into my study, where my books are."
"Sire," quod this squier, "whan it liketh yow,	"Sir," said this squire, "when it pleases you,
It is al redy, though ye wol right now."	It is all ready, even if you want it right now."
"Go we thanne soupe," quod he, "as for the beste.	"Go we then to sup," said he, "as is the best (to do).
Thise amorous folk somtyme moote han hir reste."	These amorous folk sometime must have their rest."
At after-soper fille they in tretee	At after-supper they began to discuss
What somme sholde this maistres gerdon be	What sum this master's payment should be
To remoeven alle the rokkes of Britayne,	To remove all the rocks of Brittany,
And eek from Gerounde to the mouth of Sayne.	And also from Gironde to the mouth of Seine.
He made it straunge, and swoor, so God hym save,	He raised difficulties, and swore, as God may him save,
Lasse than a thousand pound he wolde nat have,	Less than a thousand pounds he would not have,
Ne gladly for that somme he wolde nat goon.	Nor would he go gladly even for that sum.
Aurelius, with blisful herte anoon,	Aurelius, with blissful heart, at once
Answerde thus: "Fy on a thousand pound!	Answered thus: "Fie on a thousand pounds!
This wyde world, which that men seye is round,	This wide world, which men say is round,
I wolde it yeve, if I were lord of it.	I would give it, if I were lord of it.
This bargayn is ful dryve, for we been knyt.	This bargain is fully concluded, for we are agreed.
Ye shal be payed trewely, by my trouthe!	You shall be paid truly, by my pledged word!
But looketh now, for no necligence or slouthe	But look now, for no negligence or laziness
Ye tarie us heere no lenger than to-morwe."	You delay us here any longer than to-morrow."
"Nay," quod this clerk, "have heer my feith to borwe."	"Nay," said this clerk, "have here my faith as a pledge."
To bedde is goon Aurelius whan hym leste,	To bed is gone Aurelius when it pleased him,
And wel ny al that nyght he hadde his reste.	And well nigh all that night he had his rest.
What for his labour and his hope of blisse,	What for his labor and his hope of bliss,
His woful herte of penaunce hadde a lisse.	His woeful heart of suffering had relief.
Upon the morwe, whan that it was day,	Upon the morrow, when it was day,
To Britaigne tooke they the righte way,	To Brittany took they the direct route,
Aurelius and this magicien bisyde,	Aurelius and this magician beside him,
And been descended ther they wolde abyde.	And are arrived where they would stay.
And this was, as thise bookes me remembre,	And this was, as these books remind me,
The colde, frosty seson of Decembre.	The cold, frosty season of December.
Phebus wax old, and hewed lyk laton,	Phoebus grew old, and colored grayish silver,
That in his hoote declynacion	That in his hot declination (in summer)
Shoon as the burned gold with stremes brighte;	Shone like burnished gold with bright rays;
But now in Capricorn adoun he lighte,	But now in Capricorn he alights down,
Where as he shoon ful pale, I dar wel seyn.	Where he shone full pale, I dare well say.
The bittre frostes, with the sleet and reyn,	The bitter frosts, with the sleet and rain,
Destroyed hath the grene in every yerd.	Have destroyed the green in every garden.
Janus sit by the fyr, with double berd,	Janus sits by the fire, with double beard,
And drynketh of his bugle horn the wyn;	And drinks the wine from his buffalo horn;
Biforn hym stant brawen of the tusked swyn,	Before him stands meat of the tusked boar,
And "Nowel" crieth every lusty man.	And "Noel" cries every lusty man.
Aurelius in al that evere he kan	Aurelius in all that ever he can
Dooth to this maister chiere and reverence,	Provides for this master entertainment and reverence,
And preyeth hym to doon his diligence	And prays him to work diligently
To bryngen hym out of his peynes smerte,	To bring him out of his bitter pains,
Or with a swerd that he wolde slitte his herte.	Or with a sword he would slit his heart.
This subtil clerk swich routhe had of this man	This subtle clerk had such pity for this man
That nyght and day he spedde hym that he kan	That night and day he worked as fast as he can
To wayten a tyme of his conclusioun;	To seek a time for his astronomical operation;
This is to seye, to maken illusioun,	This is to say, to make illusion,
By swich an apparence or jogelrye --	By such an appearance or conjurer's trick --
I ne kan no termes of astrologye --	I know no technical terms of astrology --
That she and every wight sholde wene and seye	That she and every person should believe and say
That of Britaigne the rokkes were aweye,	That the rocks of Brittany were away,
Or ellis they were sonken under grounde.	Or else they were sunk under ground.
So atte laste he hath his tyme yfounde	So at the last he has his time found
To maken his japes and his wrecchednesse	To make his tricks and his wretched deeds
Of swich a supersticious cursednesse.	Of such a superstitious cursedness.
His tables Tolletanes forth he brought,	His astronomical tables of Toledo he brought forth,
Ful wel corrected, ne ther lakked nought,	Accurately corrected, nor was there anything lacking,
Neither his collect ne his expans yeeris,	Neither his tables of single years nor of twenty-year periods,
Ne his rootes, ne his othere geeris,	Nor his dates for calculations, nor his other apparatus,
As been his centris and his argumentz	Such as are his table of distances and his angles for calculation
And his proporcioneles convenientz	And his table for computing motions (of the planets)
For his equacions in every thyng.	For his divisions of the sphere in every detail.
And by his eighte speere in his wirkyng	And by his eighth sphere in his working
He knew ful wel how fer Alnath was shove	He knew full well how far the star Alnath was shoved
Fro the heed of thilke fixe Aries above,	From the head of that fixed Aries above,
That in the ninthe speere considered is;	That in the ninth sphere is observed;
Ful subtilly he kalkuled al this.	Full subtly he calculated all this.
Whan he hadde founde his firste mansioun,	When he had found his first position of the moon,
He knew the remenaunt by proporcioun,	He knew the remnant by astronomical tables,
And knew the arisyng of his moone weel,	And knew the arising of his moon well,
And in whos face, and terme, and everydeel;	And in which planet's face and term (zodiacal divisions), and everything;
And knew ful weel the moones mansioun	And knew full well the moon's position
Acordaunt to his operacioun,	In accordance with his operation,
And knew also his othere observaunces	And knew also his other observations
For swiche illusiouns and swiche meschaunces	For such illusions and such evil practices
As hethen folk useden in thilke dayes.	As heathen folk used in those days.
For which no lenger maked he delayes,	For which no longer he made delay,
But thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye,	But through his magic, for a week or two,
It semed that alle the rokkes were aweye.	It seemed that all the rocks were away.
Aurelius, which that yet despeired is	Aurelius, who is yet in despair
Wher he shal han his love or fare amys,	Whether he shall have his love or fare badly,
Awaiteth nyght and day on this myracle;	Waits night and day for this miracle;
And whan he knew that ther was noon obstacle,	And when he knew that there was no obstacle,
That voyded were thise rokkes everychon,	That every one of these rocks were removed,
Doun to his maistres feet he fil anon,	Down to his mistress' feet he fell at once,
And seyde, "I woful wrecche, Aurelius,	And said, "I woeful wretched, Aurelius,
Thanke yow, lord, and lady myn Venus,	Thank you, lord, and my lady Venus,
That me han holpen fro my cares colde."	Who have helped me out of my deadly cares."
And to the temple his wey forth hath he holde,	And to the temple he has held forth his way,
Where as he knew he sholde his lady see.	Where he knew he should see his lady.
And whan he saugh his tyme, anon-right hee,	And when he saw his time, immediately he,
With dredful herte and with ful humble cheere,	With fearful heart and with full humble manner,
Salewed hath his sovereyn lady deere:	Has saluted his sovereign lady dear:
"My righte lady," quod this woful man,	"My true lady," said this woeful man,
"Whom I moost drede and love as I best kan,	"Whom I most dread and love as I best know how,
And lothest were of al this world displese,	And am of all this world most reluctant to displease,
Nere it that I for yow have swich disese	Were it not that I for you have such distress
That I moste dyen heere at youre foot anon,	That I must die here at your feet right now,
Noght wolde I telle how me is wo bigon.	I would tell nothing of how I am beset by woe.
But certes outher moste I dye or pleyne;	But certainly either I must die or complain;
Ye sle me giltelees for verray peyne.	You slay me guiltless for sheer pain.
But of my deeth thogh that ye have no routhe,	But though you have no pity on my death,
Avyseth yow er that ye breke youre trouthe.	Think carefully before you break your pledged word.
Repenteth yow, for thilke God above,	Repent, for that God above,
Er ye me sleen by cause that I yow love.	Before you slay me because I love you.
For, madame, wel ye woot what ye han hight --	For, madam, you know well what you have promised --
Nat that I chalange any thyng of right	Not that I claim any thing as a right
Of yow, my sovereyn lady, but youre grace --	From you, my sovereign lady, except for your good favor --
But in a gardyn yond, at swich a place,	But in a garden yonder, at a particular place,
Ye woot right wel what ye bihighten me;	You know right well what you promised me;
And in myn hand youre trouthe plighten ye	And in my hand you pledged your word
To love me best -- God woot, ye seyde so,	To love me best -- God knows, you said so,
Al be that I unworthy am therto.	Although I am unworthy of it.
Madame, I speke it for the honour of yow	Madam, I speak it for your honor
Moore than to save myn hertes lyf right now --	More than to save my heart's life right now --
I have do so as ye comanded me;	I have done as you commanded me;
And if ye vouche sauf, ye may go see.	And if you agree, you may go see.
Dooth as yow list; have youre biheste in mynde,	Do as you please; have your promise in mind,
For, quyk or deed, right there ye shal me fynde.	For, living or dead, right there you shall find me.
In yow lith al to do me lyve or deye --	In you lies the power to make me live or die --
But wel I woot the rokkes been aweye."	But well I know the rocks are away."
He taketh his leve, and she astoned stood;	He takes his leave, and she astounded stood;
In al hir face nas a drope of blood.	In all her face was not a drop of blood.
She wende nevere han come in swich a trappe.	She never expected to have come in such a trap.
"Allas," quod she, "that evere this sholde happe!	"Alas," she said, "that ever this should happen!
For wende I nevere by possibilitee	For I never supposed by possibility
That swich a monstre or merveille myghte be!	That such a wonder or marvel could be!
It is agayns the proces of nature."	It is against the laws of nature."
And hoom she goth a sorweful creature;	And home she goes a sorrowful creature;
For verray feere unnethe may she go.	For sheer fear she can hardly walk.
She wepeth, wailleth, al a day or two,	She weeps, wails, all one day or two,
And swowneth, that it routhe was to see.	And swoons, that it was pitiful to see.
But why it was to no wight tolde shee,	But why it was she told to no person,
For out of towne was goon Arveragus.	For Arveragus had gone out of town.
But to hirself she spak, and seyde thus,	But to herself she spoke, and said thus,
With face pale and with ful sorweful cheere,	With face pale and with full sorrowful manner,
In hire compleynt, as ye shal after heere:	In her complaint, as you shall after hear:
"Allas," quod she, "on thee, Fortune, I pleyne,	"Alas," said she, "on thee, Fortune, I complain,
That unwar wrapped hast me in thy cheyne,	That without warning hast wrapped me in thy chain,
Fro which t' escape woot I no socour,	From which to escape I know no help,
Save oonly deeth or elles dishonour;	Save only death or else dishonor;
Oon of thise two bihoveth me to chese.	One of these two I am compelled to choose.
But nathelees, yet have I levere to lese	But neverthelees, yet I would rather lose
My lif than of my body to have a shame,	My life than of my body to have a shame,
Or knowe myselven fals, or lese my name;	Or know myself false, or lose my good name;
And with my deth I may be quyt, ywis.	And with my death I may be free from blame, indeed.
Hath ther nat many a noble wyf er this,	Has there not many a noble wife before this,
And many a mayde, yslayn hirself, allas,	And many a maid, slain herself, alas,
Rather than with hir body doon trespas?	Rather than do sin with her body?
"Yis, certes, lo, thise stories beren witnesse:	"Yes indeed, certainly, lo, these stories bear witness:
Whan thritty tirauntz, ful of cursednesse,	When thirty tyrants, full of cursedness,
Hadde slayn Phidon in Atthenes atte feste,	Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,
They comanded his doghtres for t' areste	They commanded (the guards) to seize his daughters
And bryngen hem biforn hem in despit,	And bring them before them as an insult,
Al naked, to fulfille hir foul delit,	All naked, to fulfill their foul delight,
And in hir fadres blood they made hem daunce	And in their father's blood they made them dance
Upon the pavement, God yeve hem meschaunce!	Upon the pavement, God give them misfortune!
For which thise woful maydens, ful of drede,	For which these woeful maidens, full of dread,
Rather than they wolde lese hir maydenhede,	Rather than they would lose their maidenhood,
They prively been stirt into a welle	They secretly have leaped into a well
And dreynte hemselven, as the bookes telle.	And drowned themselves, as the books tell.
"They of Mecene leete enquere and seke	"They of Messene had (people) search out and seek
Of Lacedomye fifty maydens eke,	Fifty maidens of Sparta also,
On whiche they wolden doon hir lecherye.	On whom they would do their lechery.
But was ther noon of al that compaignye	But there was none of all that company
That she nas slayn, and with a good entente	That she was not slain, and with a good intent
Chees rather for to dye than assente	Chose rather to die than assent
To been oppressed of hir maydenhede.	To be deprived of her maidenhood.
Why sholde I thanne to dye been in drede?	Why should I then be afraid to die?
Lo, eek, the tiraunt Aristoclides,	Lo, also, the tyrant Aristoclides,
That loved a mayden, heet Stymphalides,	That loved a maiden, called Stymphalides,
Whan that hir fader slayn was on a nyght,	When her father was slain on a night,
Unto Dianes temple goth she right,	Unto Diana's temple she goes directly,
And hente the ymage in hir handes two,	And seized the statue in her two hands,
Fro which ymage wolde she nevere go.	From which statue she would never go.
No wight ne myghte hir handes of it arace	No person could pull her hands away from it
Til she was slayn, right in the selve place.	Until she was slain, right in the same place.
"Now sith that maydens hadden swich despit	"Now since maidens had such disdain
To been defouled with mannes foul delit,	To be defiled by man's foul delight,
Wel oghte a wyf rather hirselven slee	Well ought a wife rather herself slay
Than be defouled, as it thynketh me.	Than be defiled, as it seems to me.
What shal I seyn of Hasdrubales wyf,	What shall I say of Hasdrubale's wife,
That at Cartage birafte hirself hir lyf?	That at Carthage deprived herself of her life?
For whan she saugh that Romayns wan the toun,	For when she saw that Romans won the town,
She took hir children alle, and skipte adoun	She took her children all, and leaped down
Into the fyr, and chees rather to dye	Into the fire, and chose rather to die
Than any Romayn dide hire vileynye.	Than any Roman did her a dishonor.
Hath nat Lucresse yslayn hirself, allas,	Has not Lucretia slain herself, alas,
At Rome, whan that she oppressed was	At Rome, when she was raped
Of Tarquyn, for hire thoughte it was a shame	By Tarquin, for she thought it was a shame
To lyven whan she hadde lost hir name?	To live when she had lost her good name?
The sevene maydens of Milesie also	The seven maidens of Miletus also
Han slayn hemself, for verrey drede and wo,	Have slain themselves, for sheer dread and woe,
Rather than folk of Gawle hem sholde oppresse.	Rather than folk of Galatia should rape them.
Mo than a thousand stories, as I gesse,	More than a thousand stories, as I guess,
Koude I now telle as touchynge this mateere.	Could I now tell concerning this matter.
Whan Habradate was slayn, his wyf so deere	When Habradate was slain, his wife so dear
Hirselven slow, and leet hir blood to glyde	Herself slew, and let her blood pour
In Habradates woundes depe and wyde,	In Habradate's wounds deep and wide,
And seyde, `My body, at the leeste way,	And said, `My body, at the least,
Ther shal no wight defoulen, if I may."	There shall no person defile, if I can (help it)."
"What sholde I mo ensamples heerof sayn,	"Why should I tell more examples concerning this,
Sith that so manye han hemselven slayn	Since so many have themselves slain
Wel rather than they wolde defouled be?	Well rather than they would be defiled?
I wol conclude that it is bet for me	I will conclude that it is better for me
To sleen myself than been defouled thus.	To slay myself than be defiled thus.
I wol be trewe unto Arveragus,	I will be true unto Arveragus,
Or rather sleen myself in som manere,	Or rather slay myself in some manner,
As dide Demociones doghter deere	As did Demotion's daughter dear
By cause that she wolde nat defouled be.	Because she would not defiled be.
O Cedasus, it is ful greet pitee	O Scedasus, it is a very great pity
To reden how thy doghtren deyde, allas,	To read how thy daughters died, alas,
That slowe hemself for swich manere cas.	Who slew themselves for a similar sort of cause.
As greet a pitee was it, or wel moore,	As great a pity was it, or well more,
The Theban mayden that for Nichanore	The Theban maiden that for Nichanore
Hirselven slow, right for swich manere wo.	Slew herself, exactly for such sort of woe.
Another Theban mayden dide right so;	Another Theban maiden did exactly the same;
For oon of Macidonye hadde hire oppressed,	Because one of Macedonia had raped her,
She with hire deeth hir maydenhede redressed.	She with her death avenged her maidenhood.
What shal I seye of Nicerates wyf,	What shall I say of Nicerates' wife,
That for swich cas birafte hirself hir lyf?	That for a similar case deprived herself of her life?
How trewe eek was to Alcebiades	How true also to Alcebiades was
His love, that rather for to dyen chees	His lover, who chose rather to die
Than for to suffre his body unburyed be.	Than to allow his body to be unburied.
Lo, which a wyf was Alceste," quod she.	Lo, what a wife was Alcestis," she said.
"What seith Omer of goode Penalopee?	"What says Homer of good Penelope?
Al Grece knoweth of hire chastitee.	All Greece knows of her chastity.
Pardee, of Laodomya is writen thus,	By God, of Laodomia is written thus,
That whan at Troie was slayn Protheselaus,	That when at Troy Protheselaus was slain,
Ne lenger wolde she lyve after his day.	No longer would she live after his day (i.e., death).
The same of noble Porcia telle I may;	The same of noble Portia I can tell;
Withoute Brutus koude she nat lyve,	Without Brutus she could not live,
To whom she hadde al hool hir herte yive.	To whom she had entirely given her heart.
The parfit wyfhod of Arthemesie	The perfect wifehood of Arthemesie
Honured is thurgh al the Barbarie.	Honored is through all heathendom.
O Teuta, queene, thy wyfly chastitee	O Teuta, queen, thy wifely chastity
To alle wyves may a mirour bee.	To all wives may be a mirror.
The same thyng I seye of Bilyea,	The same thing I say of Bilia,
Of Rodogone, and eek Valeria."	Of Rhodogune, and also Valeria."
Thus pleyned Dorigen a day or tweye,	Thus Dorigen complained a day or two,
Purposynge evere that she wolde deye.	Intending ever that she would die.
But nathelees, upon the thridde nyght,	But neverthelees, upon the third night,
Hoom cam Arveragus, this worthy knyght,	Home came Arveragus, this worthy knight,
And asked hire why that she weep so soore;	And asked her why she wept so bitterly;
And she gan wepen ever lenger the moore.	And she began to weep, ever the longer (she wept) the more (she wept) .
"Allas," quod she, "that evere was I born!	"Alas," said she, "that ever I was born!
Thus have I seyd," quod she, "thus have I sworn" --	Thus have I said," said she, "thus have I sworn" --
And toold hym al as ye han herd bifore;	And told him all as you have heard before;
It nedeth nat reherce it yow namoore.	There is no need to repeat it to you any more.
This housbonde, with glad chiere, in freendly wyse	This husband, with cheerful demeanor, in a friendly manner
Answerde and seyde as I shal yow devyse:	Answered and said as I shall tell you:
"Is ther oght elles, Dorigen, but this?"	"Is there anything else, Dorigen, but this?"
"Nay, nay," quod she, "God helpe me so as wys!	"Nay, nay," she said, "So help me God!
This is to muche, and it were Goddes wille."	This is too much, even if it were God's will."
"Ye, wyf," quod he, "lat slepen that is stille.	"Yes, wife," he said, "let sleep that which is still.
It may be wel, paraventure, yet to day.	It may be well, perhaps, yet to day.
Ye shul youre trouthe holden, by my fay!	You shall keep your pledged word, by my faith!
For God so wisly have mercy upon me,	For as surely as God may have mercy upon me,
I hadde wel levere ystiked for to be	I had well rather be stabbed
For verray love which that I to yow have,	For sheer love which I to have for you,
But if ye sholde youre trouthe kepe and save.	Than you should (do anything but) keep and save your pledged word.
Trouthe is the hyeste thyng that man may kepe" --	One's pldged word is the highest thing that one may keep" --
But with that word he brast anon to wepe,	But with that word he immediately burst into tears,
And seyde, "I yow forbede, up peyne of deeth,	And said, "I you forbid, upon pain of death,
That nevere, whil thee lasteth lyf ne breeth,	That never, while thy life or breath lasts,
To no wight telle thou of this aventure --	Thou tell any person about this adventure --
As I may best, I wol my wo endure --	As I best can, I will my woe endure --
Ne make no contenance of hevynesse,	Nor make any outward appearance of sadness,
That folk of yow may demen harm or gesse."	That folk may believe or guess anything harmful concerning you."
And forth he cleped a squier and a mayde:	And forth he called a squire and a maid:
"Gooth forth anon with Dorigen," he sayde,	"Go forth right now with Dorigen," he said,
"And bryngeth hire to swich a place anon."	"And bring her to such a place quickly."
They take hir leve, and on hir wey they gon,	They take their leave, and on their way they go,
But they ne wiste why she thider wente.	But they knew not why she thither went.
He nolde no wight tellen his entente.	He would no person tell his intention.
Paraventure an heep of yow, ywis,	Perhaps a heap of you, indeed,
Wol holden hym a lewed man in this	Will consider him a foolish man in this
That he wol putte his wyf in jupartie.	That he will put his wife in jeopardy.
Herkneth the tale er ye upon hire crie.	Listen to the tale before you cry out about her.
She may have bettre fortune than yow semeth;	She may have better fortune than it seems to you;
And whan that ye han herd the tale, demeth.	And when you have heard the tale, judge.
This squier, which that highte Aurelius,	This squire, who was called Aurelius,
On Dorigen that was so amorus,	On Dorigen who was so amorous,
Of aventure happed hire to meete	By chance happened to meet her
Amydde the toun, right in the quykkest strete,	Amidst the town, right in the busiest street,
As she was bown to goon the wey forth right	As she was about to go the way directly
Toward the gardyn ther as she had hight.	Toward the garden where she had promised (to go).
And he was to the gardyn-ward also;	And he was going toward the garden also;
For wel he spyed whan she wolde go	For well he spied when she would go
Out of hir hous to any maner place.	Out of her house to any sort of place.
But thus they mette, of aventure or grace,	But thus they met, by chance or luck,
And he saleweth hire with glad entente,	And he salutes her cheerfully,
And asked of hire whiderward she wente;	And asked her where she went;
And she answerde, half as she were mad,	And she answered, as if she were half mad,
"Unto the gardyn, as myn housbonde bad,	"Unto the garden, as my husband commanded,
My trouthe for to holde -- allas, allas!"	My pledged word to keep -- alas, alas!"
Aurelius gan wondren on this cas,	Aurelius began to wonder about this case,
And in his herte hadde greet compassioun	And in his heart had great compassion
Of hire and of hire lamentacioun,	Of her and of her lamentation,
And of Arveragus, the worthy knyght,	And of Arveragus, the worthy knight,
That bad hire holden al that she had hight,	Who commanded her to keep all that she had promised,
So looth hym was his wyf sholde breke hir trouthe;	So hateful to him it was that his wife should break her word;
And in his herte he caughte of this greet routhe,	And in his heart he took great pity on this,
Considerynge the beste on every syde,	Considering what would be best in every respect,
That fro his lust yet were hym levere abyde	That he would rather yet refrain from his desire
Than doon so heigh a cherlyssh wrecchednesse	Than do so great a churlish despicable act
Agayns franchise and alle gentillesse;	Against generosity and all nobility of character;
For which in fewe wordes seyde he thus:	For which in few words he said thus:
"Madame, seyth to youre lord Arveragus	"Madam, say to your lord Arveragus
That sith I se his grete gentillesse	That since I see his great graciousness
To yow, and eek I se wel youre distresse,	To you, and also I see well your distress,
That him were levere han shame (and that were routhe)	That he would rather have shame (and that would be a pity)
Than ye to me sholde breke thus youre trouthe,	Than you should thus break your pledged word to me,
I have wel levere evere to suffre wo	I would well rather suffer woe always
Than I departe the love bitwix yow two.	Than I should break apart the love between you two.
I yow relesse, madame, into youre hond	I release you, madam, into your hand I return
Quyt every serement and every bond	Freely every pledge and every bond
That ye han maad to me as heerbiforn,	That you have made to me before now,
Sith thilke tyme which that ye were born.	Since that time when you were born.
My trouthe I plighte, I shal yow never repreve	I pledge my word, I shall never reprove you
Of no biheste, and heere I take my leve,	For any promise, and here I take my leave,
As of the treweste and the beste wyf	Of the truest and the best wife
That evere yet I knew in al my lyf.	That ever yet I knew in all my life.
But every wyf be war of hire biheeste!	But let every wife beware of her promise!
On Dorigen remembreth, atte leeste.	Remember Dorigen, at the least.
Thus kan a squier doon a gentil dede	Thus can a squire do a gentle deed
As wel as kan a knyght, withouten drede."	As well as can a knight, without doubt."
She thonketh hym upon hir knees al bare,	She thanks him upon her bare knees,
And hoom unto hir housbonde is she fare,	And home unto her husband she is gone,
And tolde hym al, as ye han herd me sayd;	And told him all, as you have heard me say;
And be ye siker, he was so weel apayd	And be you sure, he was so well pleased
That it were impossible me to wryte.	That it would be impossible for me to write.
What sholde I lenger of this cas endyte?	Why should I write longer about this matter?
Arveragus and Dorigen his wyf	Arveragus and Dorigen his wife
In sovereyn blisse leden forth hir lyf.	In perfect bliss lead forth their life.
Nevere eft ne was ther angre hem bitwene.	Never again was there any anger between them.
He cherisseth hire as though she were a queene,	He cherishes her as though she were a queen,
And she was to hym trewe for everemoore.	And she was to him true for evermore.
Of thise two folk ye gete of me namoore.	Of these two folk you get of me no more.
Aurelius, that his cost hath al forlorn,	Aurelius, that all his expenditure has forfeited,
Curseth the tyme that evere he was born:	Curses the time that ever he was born:
"Allas!" quod he. "Allas, that I bihighte	"Alas!" said he. "Alas, that I promised
Of pured gold a thousand pound of wighte	Of refined gold a thousand pounds of weight
Unto this philosophre! How shal I do?	Unto this scientist! What shall I do?
I se namoore but that I am fordo.	I see no more but that I am ruined.
Myn heritage moot I nedes selle,	My heritage I must of necessity sell,
And been a beggere; heere may I nat dwelle	And be a beggar; here I may not remain
And shamen al my kynrede in this place,	And shame all my kin in this place,
But I of hym may gete bettre grace.	Unless I can get a better grace (favor) from him.
But nathelees, I wole of hym assaye,	But nonetheless, I will try him, (offering)
At certeyn dayes, yeer by yeer, to paye,	At specific days, year by year, to pay,
And thanke hym of his grete curteisye.	And thank him for his great courtesy.
My trouthe wol I kepe, I wol nat lye."	My word I will keep, I will not lie."
With herte soor he gooth unto his cofre,	With a sore heart he goes unto his money box,
And broghte gold unto this philosophre,	And brought gold unto this scientist,
The value of fyve hundred pound, I gesse,	The value of five hundred pounds, I guess,
And hym bisecheth, of his gentillesse,	And him beseeches, of his nobleness,
To graunte hym dayes of the remenaunt;	To grant him days (on which to pay) the remnant;
And seyde, "Maister, I dar wel make avaunt,	And said, "Master, I dare well make boast,
I failled nevere of my trouthe as yit.	I failed never of my pledged word as yet.
For sikerly my dette shal be quyt	For surely my debt shall be repaid
Towardes yow, howevere that I fare	To you, even though I have
To goon a-begged in my kirtle bare.	To go a-begging in my bare tunic.
But wolde ye vouche sauf, upon seuretee,	But if you would agree, upon my promise,
Two yeer or thre for to respiten me,	To grant me a respite for two years or three,
Thanne were I wel; for elles moot I selle	Then I would be well; for otherwise I must sell
Myn heritage; ther is namoore to telle."	My heritage; there is no more to tell."
This philosophre sobrely answerde,	This scientist soberly answered,
And seyde thus, whan he thise wordes herde:	And said thus, when he heard these words:
"Have I nat holden covenant unto thee?"	"Have I not kept my agreement with thee?"
"Yes, certes, wel and trewely," quod he.	"Yes, certainly, well and truly," said he.
"Hastow nat had thy lady as thee liketh?"	"Hast thou not had thy lady as it pleases thee?"
"No, no," quod he, and sorwefully he siketh.	"No, no," said he, and sorrowfully he sighs.
"What was the cause? Tel me if thou kan."	"What was the cause? Tel me if thou know how."
Aurelius his tale anon bigan,	Aurelius his tale immediately began,
And tolde hym al, as ye han herd bifoore;	And told him all, as you have heard before;
It nedeth nat to yow reherce it moore.	There is no need to repeat it to you again.
He seide, "Arveragus, of gentillesse,	He said, "Arveragus, of his nobility,
Hadde levere dye in sorwe and in distresse	Had rather die in sorrow and in distress
Than that his wyf were of hir trouthe fals."	Than that his wife would be false of her pledged word."
The sorwe of Dorigen he tolde hym als;	The sorrow of Dorigen he told him also;
How looth hire was to been a wikked wyf,	How loathfull to her it was to be a wicked wife,
And that she levere had lost that day hir lyf,	And that she would rather have lost her life that day,
And that hir trouthe she swoor thurgh innocence,	And that her word she swore through ignorance,
She nevere erst hadde herde speke of apparence.	She never before had heard tell of illusion.
"That made me han of hire so greet pitee;	"That made me have for her such great pity;
And right as frely as he sente hire me,	And right as freely as he sent her to me,
As frely sente I hire to hym ageyn.	As freely I sent her to him again.
This al and som; ther is namoore to seyn."	This is the entire matter; there is no more to say."
This philosophre answerde, "Leeve brother,	This scientist answered, "Dear brother,
Everich of yow dide gentilly til oother.	Every one of you did nobly to the other.
Thou art a squier, and he is a knyght;	Thou art a squire, and he is a knight;
But God forbede, for his blisful myght,	But God forbid, for his blissful might,
But if a clerk koude doon a gentil dede	That a clerk could not do a gentle deed
As wel as any of yow, it is no drede!	As well as any of you, it is no doubt!
Sire, I releesse thee thy thousand pound,	Sir, I release thee from thy (debt of a) thousand pounds,
As thou right now were cropen out of the ground,	As if thou right now were crept out of the ground,
Ne nevere er now ne haddest knowen me.	Nor never before now had known me.
For, sire, I wol nat taken a peny of thee	For, sir, I will not take a penny from thee
For al my craft, ne noght for my travaille.	For all my craft, nor anything for my labor.
Thou hast ypayed wel for my vitaille.	Thou hast paid well for my living expenses.
It is ynogh, and farewel, have good day!"	It is enough, and farewell, have good day!"
And took his hors, and forth he goth his way.	And took his horse, and forth he goes his way.
Lordynges, this question, thanne, wol I aske now,	Gentlemen, this question, then, will I ask now,
Which was the mooste fre, as thynketh yow?	Which was the most free, as it seems to you?
Now telleth me, er that ye ferther wende.	Now tell me, before you farther go.
I kan namoore; my tale is at an ende.	I know no more; my tale is at an end.
The Prologe of the Cokes Tale	The Prologue of the Cook's Tale
The Cook of Londoun, whil the Reve spak,	The Cook of London, while the Reeve spoke,
For joye him thoughte he clawed him on the bak.	Was so happy he thought the Reeve scratched him on the back.
"Ha! ha!" quod he, "For Cristes passion,	"Ha! ha!" said he, "For Christ's passion,
This millere hadde a sharp conclusion	This miller had a sharp conclusion
Upon his argument of herbergage!	To his logical argument about lodging!
Wel seyde Salomon in his langage,	Well said Salomon in his language,
`Ne bryng nat every man into thyn hous,'	`Do not bring every man into thy house,'
For herberwynge by nyghte is perilous.	For providing lodging by night is perilous.
Wel oghte a man avysed for to be	Well ought a man to take heed
Whom that he broghte into his pryvetee.	Whom he brings into his private home.
I pray to God, so yeve me sorwe and care	I pray to God, give me sorrow and care
If evere, sitthe I highte Hogge of Ware,	If ever, since I was called Roger of Ware,
Herde I a millere bettre yset a-werk.	I heard a miller better set to work (tricked).
He hadde a jape of malice in the derk.	He had a malicious trick played on him in the dark.
But God forbede that we stynte heere;	But God forbid that we stop here;
And therfore, if ye vouche-sauf to heere	And therefore, if you agree to hear
A tale of me, that am a povre man,	A tale by me, who am a poor man,
I wol yow telle, as wel as evere I kan,	I will tell you, as well as ever I can,
A litel jape that fil in oure citee."	A little amusing affair that happened in our city."
Oure Hoost answerde and seide, "I graunte it thee.	Our Host answered and said, "I grant it to thee.
Now telle on, Roger; looke that it be good,	Now tell on, Roger; look that it be good,
For many a pastee hastow laten blood,	For of many a pastry hast thou drawn out the gravy,
And many a Jakke of Dovere hastow soold	And many a Jack of Dover (a kind of pie) hast thou sold
That hath been twies hoot and twies coold.	That has been twice hot and twice cold.
Of many a pilgrym hastow Cristes curs,	Of many a pilgrim hast thou Christ's curse,
For of thy percely yet they fare the wors,	For of thy parsley yet they fare the worse,
That they han eten with thy stubbel goos,	Which they have eaten with thy stubble-fed goose,
For in thy shoppe is many a flye loos.	For in thy shop is many a fly loose.
Now telle on, gentil Roger by thy name.	Now tell on, gentle Roger by thy name.
But yet I pray thee, be nat wroth for game;	But yet I pray thee, be not angry about a joke;
A man may seye ful sooth in game and pley."	A man may speak very truthfully in joking and play."
"Thou seist ful sooth," quod Roger, "by my fey!	"Thou sayest the truth," said Roger, "by my faith!
But `sooth pley, quaad pley,' as the Flemyng seith.	But `a true jest is a bad jest,' as the Fleming says.
And therfore, Herry Bailly, by thy feith,	And therefore, Harry Bailly, by thy faith,
Be thou nat wrooth, er we departen heer,	Be thou not angry, ere we depart here,
Though that my tale be of an hostileer.	Even though my tale is of an inn-keeper.
But nathelees I wol nat telle it yit;	But nonetheless I will not tell it yet;
But er we parte, ywis, thou shalt be quit."	But before we part, indeed, thou shalt be repaid."
And therwithal he lough and made cheere,	And with that he laughed and made good cheer,
And seyde his tale, as ye shul after heere.	And told his tale, as you shall next hear.
Heere bigynneth the Cookes Tale.	Here begins the Cook's Tale.
A prentys whilom dwelled in oure citee,	A apprentice once dwelt in our city,
And of a craft of vitailliers was hee.	And of a craft of food merchants was he.
Gaillard he was as goldfynch in the shawe,	Gaily dressed he was as is a goldfinch in the woods,
Broun as a berye, a propre short felawe,	Brown as a berry, a good-looking short fellow,
With lokkes blake, ykembd ful fetisly.	With locks black, combed full elegantly.
Dauncen he koude so wel and jolily	He could dance so well and jollily
That he was cleped Perkyn Revelour.	That he was called Perkin Reveler.
He was as ful of love and paramour	He was as full of love and womanizing
As is the hyve ful of hony sweete;	As is the hive full of honey sweet;
Wel was the wenche with hym myghte meete.	Happy was the wench who with him might meet.
At every bridale wolde he synge and hoppe;	At every wedding party he would sing and dance;
He loved bet the taverne than the shoppe.	He loved the tavern better than the shop.
For whan ther any ridyng was in Chepe,	For when there was any procession in Cheapside,
Out of the shoppe thider wolde he lepe --	Out of the shop thither would he leap --
Til that he hadde al the sighte yseyn,	Until that he had all the sight seen,
And daunced wel, he wolde nat come ayeyn --	And danced well, he would not come back--
And gadered hym a meynee of his sort	And gathered him a company of his sort
To hoppe and synge and maken swich disport;	To dance and sing and make such merriment;
And ther they setten stevene for to meete,	And there they agreed on a time to meet,
To pleyen at the dys in swich a streete.	To play at dice in such and such a street.
For in the toune nas ther no prentys	For in the town there was no apprentice
That fairer koude caste a paire of dys	That could better throw a pair of dice
Than Perkyn koude, and therto he was free	Than Perkin could, and thereto he was free
Of his dispense, in place of pryvetee.	In his spending, in a private place.
That fond his maister wel in his chaffare,	That found his master easily in his business accounts,
For often tyme he foond his box ful bare.	For many times he found his cash box completely bare.
For sikerly a prentys revelour	For surely (in the case of) an revelling apprentice
That haunteth dys, riot, or paramour,	Who makes a practice of dicing, debauchery, or womanizing,
His maister shal it in his shoppe abye,	His master shall pay for it in his shop,
Al have he no part of the mynstralcye.	Even though he has no share of the entertainment (for which he pays).
For thefte and riot, they been convertible,	For theft and debauchery, they are interchangeable.
Al konne he pleye on gyterne or ribible.	Even though he knows how to play on guitar or fiddle.
Revel and trouthe, as in a lowe degree,	Revelling and honesty, in one of low degree,
They been ful wrothe al day, as men may see.	Are always incompatible, as anyone can see.
This joly prentys with his maister bood,	This jolly apprentice with his master remained,
Til he were ny out of his prentishood,	Until he was nearly out of his apprenticeship,
Al were he snybbed bothe erly and late,	Although he was rebuked both early and late,
And somtyme lad with revel to Newegate.	And sometimes taken (as a prisoner) with music to Newgate prison.
But atte laste his maister hym bithoghte,	But at the last his master remembered,
Upon a day, whan he his papir soghte,	Upon a day, when Perkin sought his certificate of release,
Of a proverbe that seith this same word:	A proverb that says this same word:
"Wel bet is roten appul out of hoord	"Well better is a rotten apple out of the store
Than that it rotie al the remenaunt."	Than that it rot al the remnant."
So fareth it by a riotous servaunt;	So fares it with a debauched servant;
It is ful lasse harm to lete hym pace,	It is much less harm to let him go away,
Than he shende alle the servantz in the place.	Than that he should ruin all the servants in the place.
Therfore his maister yaf hym acquitance,	Therefore his master gave him his certificate,
And bad hym go, with sorwe and with meschance!	And ordered him to go, with sorrow and with bad luck!
And thus this joly prentys hadde his leve.	And thus this jolly apprentice had his leave.
Now lat hym riote al the nyght or leve.	Now let him revel all the night or leave off (do as he chooses).
And for ther is no theef withoute a lowke,	And because there is no thief without an accomplice,
That helpeth hym to wasten and to sowke	Who helps him to waste and to consume
Of that he brybe kan or borwe may,	That which he can steal or may borrow,
Anon he sente his bed and his array	Right away he sent his bed and his clothing
Unto a compeer of his owene sort,	Unto a companion of his own sort,
That lovede dys, and revel, and disport,	Who loved dicing, and revelling, and having fun,
And hadde a wyf that heeld for contenance	And had a wife that kept for the sake of appearances
A shoppe, and swyved for hir sustenance.	A shop, and screwed for her living.
Here folweth the Prologe of the Maunciples Tale.	Here follows the prologue of the Maniciple's Tale.
Woot ye nat where ther stant a litel toun	Know you not where there stands a little town
Which that ycleped is Bobbe-up-and-doun,	Which is called Bobbe-up-and-down,
Under the Blee, in Caunterbury Weye?	Under the Blee, in Canterbury Way?
Ther gan oure Hooste for to jape and pleye,	There began our Host to joke and play,
And seyde, "Sires, what! Dun is in the myre!	And said, "Sirs, what! Dun is in the mire!
Is ther no man, for preyere ne for hyre,	Is there no man, for prayer nor for hire,
That wole awake oure felawe al bihynde?	That will awake our fellow far behind us?
A theef myghte hym ful lightly robbe and bynde.	A thief might full easily rob and bind him.
See how he nappeth! See how, for cokkes bones,	See how he naps! See how, for cock's bones,
That he wol falle fro his hors atones!	That he will soon fall from his horse!
Is that a cook of Londoun, with meschaunce?	Is that a cook of London, with bad luck (to him)?
Do hym come forth, he knoweth his penaunce;	Make him come forth, he knows his penance;
For he shal telle a tale, by my fey,	For he shall tell a tale, by my faith,
Although it be nat worth a botel hey.	Although it be not worth a bundle of hay.
Awake, thou Cook," quod he, "God yeve thee sorwe!	Awake, thou Cook," said he, "God give thee sorrow!
What eyleth thee to slepe by the morwe?	What ails thee to sleep in the morning?
Hastow had fleen al nyght, or artow dronke?	Hast thou had fleas all night, or art thou drunk?
Or hastow with som quene al nyght yswonke,	Or hast thou with some prostitute all night labored,
So that thow mayst nat holden up thyn heed?"	So that thou can not hold up thy head?"
This Cook, that was ful pale and no thyng reed,	This Cook, who was full pale and not at all red,
Seyde to oure Hoost, "So God my soule blesse,	Said to our Host, "God bless my soul,
As ther is falle on me swich hevynesse,	There is fallen on me such heaviness,
Noot I nat why, that me were levere slepe	Know I not why, that I would rather sleep
Than the beste galon wyn in Chepe."	Than (have) the best gallon of wine in Cheapside."
"Wel," quod the Maunciple, "if it may doon ese	"Well," said the Manciple, "if it may give relief
To thee, sire Cook, and to no wight displese,	To thee, sir Cook, and be displeasing to no person,
Which that heere rideth in this compaignye,	Who rides here in this company,
And that oure Hoost wole, of his curteisye,	And (providing) that our Host would (agree), of his courtesy,
I wol as now excuse thee of thy tale.	I will for now excuse thee of thy tale.
For, in good feith, thy visage is ful pale,	For, in good faith, thy visage is full pale,
Thyne eyen daswen eek, as that me thynketh,	Thy eyes are dazed also, as it seems to me,
And, wel I woot, thy breeth ful soure stynketh:	And, well I know, thy breath full sourly stinks:
That sheweth wel thou art nat wel disposed.	That shows well thou art not in good health.
Of me, certeyn, thou shalt nat been yglosed.	By me, certainly, thou shalt not be deceived.
See how he ganeth, lo, this dronken wight,	See how he yawns, lo, this drunken fellow,
As though he wolde swolwe us anonright.	As though he would swallow us right away.
Hoold cloos thy mouth, man, by thy fader kyn!	Keep thy mouth closed, man, by thy father's kin!
The devel of helle sette his foot therin!	The devil of hell set his foot therein!
Thy cursed breeth infecte wole us alle.	Thy cursed breath would infect us all.
Fy, stynkyng swyn! Fy, foule moote thee falle!	Fie, stinking swine! Fie, may foul fortune thee befall!
A, taketh heede, sires, of this lusty man.	Ah, take heed, sirs, of this lusty man.
Now, sweete sire, wol ye justen atte fan?	Now, sweet sir, will you joust at the quintain?
Therto me thynketh ye been wel yshape!	It seems to me you are in good shape for that!
I trowe that ye dronken han wyn ape,	I believe that you have drunk until you act like an ape,
And that is whan men pleyen with a straw."	And that is when men play with a straw."
And with this speche the Cook wax wrooth and wraw,	And with this speech the Cook became angry and enraged,
And on the Manciple he gan nodde faste	And on the Manciple he began to shake his head fast
For lakke of speche, and doun the hors hym caste,	For lack of speech, and down the horse him threw,
Where as he lay, til that men hym up took.	Where he lay, until men lifted him up.
This was a fair chyvachee of a cook!	This was a fine feat of horsemanship by a cook!
Allas, he nadde holde hym by his ladel!	Alas, he had not kept himself by his ladle (i.e., stayed home)!
And er that he agayn were in his sadel,	And before he was again in his saddle,
Ther was greet showvyng bothe to and fro	There was great shoving both to and fro
To lifte hym up, and muchel care and wo,	To lift him up, and much care and woe,
So unweeldy was this sory palled goost.	So unwieldy was this sorry enfeebled soul.
And to the Manciple thanne spak oure Hoost:	And to the Manciple then spoke our Host:
"By cause drynke hath dominacioun	"Because drink has domination
Upon this man, by my savacioun,	Upon this man, by my salvation,
I trowe he lewedly wolde telle his tale.	I believe he would tell his tale badly.
For, were it wyn or oold or moysty ale	For, were it wine or old or new ale
That he hath dronke, he speketh in his nose,	That he has drunk, he speaks in his nose,
And fneseth faste, and eek he hath the pose.	And sneezes fast, and also he has a head cold.
"He hath also to do moore than ynough	"He has also more than enough to do
To kepen hym and his capul out of the slough;	To keep him and his horse out of the mud;
And if he falle from his capul eftsoone,	And if he fall from his horse again,
Thanne shal we alle have ynogh to doone	Then shall we all have enough to do
In liftyng up his hevy dronken cors.	In lifting up his heavy drunken body.
Telle on thy tale; of hym make I no fors.	Tell on thy tale; of him I take no account.
"But yet, Manciple, in feith thou art to nyce,	"But yet, Manciple, in faith thou art too foolish,
Thus openly repreve hym of his vice.	Thus openly to reprove him of his vice.
Another day he wole, peraventure,	Another day he would, perhaps,
Reclayme thee and brynge thee to lure;	Recall thee and bring thee to the lure (like a hawk);
I meene, he speke wole of smale thynges,	I mean, he would speak of small things,
As for to pynchen at thy rekenynges,	As for to find fault with thy accounts,
That were nat honest, if it cam to preef."	That may not be honest, if it comes to proof."
"No," quod the Manciple, "that were a greet mescheef!	"No," said the Manciple, "that would be a great mischief!
So myghte he lightly brynge me in the snare.	In that way he could easily bring me into the trap.
Yet hadde I levere payen for the mare	Yet I would rather pay for the mare
Which he rit on, than he sholde with me stryve.	That he rides on, than he should strive with me.
I wol nat wratthen hym, also moot I thryve!	I will not anger him, as I may thrive!
That that I spak, I seyde it in my bourde.	That which I spoke, I said it in my joking.
And wite ye what? I have heer in a gourde	And do you know what? I have here in a gourd
A draghte of wyn, ye, of a ripe grape,	A draught of wine, yes, of a ripe grape,
And right anon ye shul seen a good jape.	And right away you shall see a good joke.
This Cook shal drynke therof, if I may.	This Cook shall drink thereof, if I may.
Up peyne of deeth, he wol nat seye me nay."	Upon pain of death, he will not say me nay."
And certeynly, to tellen as it was,	And certainly, to tell it as it was,
Of this vessel the Cook drank faste, allas!	Of this vessel the Cook drank fast, alas!
What neded hym? He drank ynough biforn.	Why did he need that? He drank enough before.
And whan he hadde pouped in this horn,	And when he had blown in this horn,
To the Manciple he took the gourde agayn;	To the Manciple he gave the gourd again;
And of that drynke the Cook was wonder fayn,	And of that drink the Cook was wonderfully pleased,
And thanked hym in swich wise as he koude.	And thanked him in such a way as he could.
Thanne gan oure Hoost to laughen wonder loude,	Then began our Host to laugh wonderfully loud,
And seyde, "I se wel it is necessarie,	And said, "I see well it is necessary,
Where that we goon, good drynke with us carie;	Wherever we go, to carry good drink with us;
For that wol turne rancour and disese	For that will turn rancor and strife
T' acord and love, and many a wrong apese.	To accord and love, and appease many a wrong.
"O Bacus, yblessed be thy name,	"O Bacchus, blessed be thy name,
That so kanst turnen ernest into game!	Who so can turn earnest into game!
Worshipe and thank be to thy deitee!	Worship and thanks be to thy deity!
Of that mateere ye gete namoore of me.	Of that matter you get no more of me.
Telle on thy tale, Manciple, I thee preye."	Tell on thy tale, Manciple, I thee pray."
"Wel, sire," quod he, "now herkneth what I seye."	"Well, sir," said he, "now hearken what I say."
Heere bigynneth the Maunciples Tale of the Crowe.	Here begins the Manciple's Tale of the Crow.
Whan Phebus dwelled heere in this erthe adoun,	When Phoebus dwelled down here in this earth,
As olde bookes maken mencioun,	As old books make mention,
He was the mooste lusty bachiler	He was the most lusty bachelor
In al this world, and eek the beste archer.	In all this world, and also the best archer.
He slow Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay	He slew Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay
Slepynge agayn the sonne upon a day;	Sleeping in the sun upon a day;
And many another noble worthy dede	And many another noble worthy deed
He with his bowe wroghte, as men may rede.	He wrought with his bow, as men may read.
Pleyen he koude on every mynstralcie,	He could play on every minstrelsy,
And syngen that it was a melodie	And sing so that it was a pleasure
To heeren of his cleere voys the soun.	To hear of his clear voice the sound.
Certes the kyng of Thebes, Amphioun,	Certainly the king of Thebes, Amphioun,
That with his syngyng walled that citee,	Who with his singing walled that city,
Koude nevere syngen half so wel as hee.	Could never sing half so well as he.
Therto he was the semelieste man	Thereto he was the best looking man
That is or was sith that the world bigan.	That is or was since the world began.
What nedeth it his fetures to discryve?	What needs it his features to describe?
For in this world was noon so faire on-lyve.	For in this world was no one so handsome alive.
He was therwith fulfild of gentillesse,	He was therewith filled full of nobility,
Of honour, and of parfit worthynesse.	Of honor, and of perfect worthiness.
This Phebus, that was flour of bachilrie,	This Phoebus, which was the flower of knighthood,
As wel in fredom as in chivalrie,	As well in generosity as in chivalry,
For his desport, in signe eek of victorie	For his amusement, in sign also of victory
Of Phitoun, so as telleth us the storie,	Over Phitoun, as tells us the story,
Was wont to beren in his hand a bowe.	Was accustomed to bear in his hand a bow.
Now hadde this Phebus in his hous a crowe	Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow
Which in a cage he fostred many a day,	Which in a cage he fostered many a day,
And taughte it speken, as men teche a jay.	And taught it to speak, as men teach a jay.
Whit was this crowe as is a snow-whit swan,	White was this crow as is a snow-white swan,
And countrefete the speche of every man	And imitate the speech of every man
He koude, whan he sholde telle a tale.	He could, when he should tell a tale.
Therwith in al this world no nyghtyngale	Therewith in all this world no nightingale
Ne koude, by an hondred thousand deel,	Could not, by a hundred thousand times,
Syngen so wonder myrily and weel.	Sing so wonderfully merrily and well.
Now hadde this Phebus in his hous a wyf	Now had this Phoebus in his house a woman
Which that he lovede moore than his lyf,	Whom he loved more than his life,
And nyght and day dide evere his diligence	And night and day did ever his efforts
Hir for to plese and doon hire reverence,	To please her and do her reverence,
Save oonly, if the sothe that I shal sayn,	Save only, if I shall say the truth,
Jalous he was, and wolde have kept hire fayn.	Jealous he was, and would eagerly have kept her.
For hym were looth byjaped for to be,	For he was loath to be tricked,
And so is every wight in swich degree;	And so is every person in such a situation;
But al in ydel, for it availleth noght.	But all in vain, for it does not help.
A good wyf, that is clene of werk and thoght,	A good wife, who is clean of deed and thought,
Sholde nat been kept in noon awayt, certayn;	Should not be constantly watched, certainly;
And trewely the labour is in vayn	And truly the labor is in vain
To kepe a shrewe, for it wol nat bee.	To keep a shrew, for it will not be.
This holde I for a verray nycetee,	This hold I for a real act of folly,
To spille labour for to kepe wyves:	To waste labor guarding wives:
Thus writen olde clerkes in hir lyves.	Thus wrote old clerks in their time.
But now to purpos, as I first bigan:	But now to purpose, as I first began:
This worthy Phebus dooth al that he kan	This worthy Phoebus does all that he can
To plesen hire, wenynge for swich plesaunce,	To please her, supposing for such pleasing actions,
And for his manhede and his governaunce,	And for his manly qualities and his behavior,
That no man sholde han put hym from hir grace.	That no man should have put him out of her grace.
But God it woot, ther may no man embrace	But God knows it, there can no man embrace
As to destreyne a thyng which that nature	And restrain a thing which nature
Hath natureelly set in a creature.	Has naturally set in a creature.
Taak any bryd, and put it in a cage,	Take any bird, and put it in a cage,
And do al thyn entente and thy corage	And give all thy attention and take thy pains
To fostre it tendrely with mete and drynke	To foster it tenderly with food and drink
Of alle deyntees that thou kanst bithynke,	Of all dainties that thou can imagine,
And keep it al so clenly as thou may,	And keep it as cleanly as thou can,
Although his cage of gold be never so gay,	Although his cage of gold be never so gay,
Yet hath this brid, by twenty thousand foold,	Yet would this bird, by twenty thousand times,
Levere in a forest that is rude and coold	Rather in a forest that is rude and cold
Goon ete wormes and swich wrecchednesse.	Go eat worms and such wretched food.
For evere this brid wol doon his bisynesse	For ever this bird will work diligently
To escape out of his cage, yif he may.	To escape out of his cage, if he can.
His libertee this brid desireth ay.	His liberty this bird desires always.
Lat take a cat, and fostre hym wel with milk	Let's take a cat, and foster him well with milk
And tendre flessh, and make his couche of silk,	And tender meat, and make his couch of silk,
And lat hym seen a mous go by the wal,	And let him see a mouse go by the wall,
Anon he weyveth milk and flessh and al,	Right then he refuses milk and meat and all,
And every deyntee that is in that hous,	And every dainty that is in that house,
Swich appetit hath he to ete a mous.	Such appetite has he to eat a mouse.
Lo, heere hath lust his dominacioun,	Lo, here has lust his domination,
And appetit fleemeth discrecioun.	And appetite drives away discretion.
A she-wolf hath also a vileyns kynde.	A she-wolf has also an evil nature.
The lewedeste wolf that she may fynde,	The most crude wolf that she can find,
Or leest of reputacioun, wol she take,	Or least of reputation, will she take,
In tyme whan hir lust to han a make.	In time when she lusts to have a mate.
Alle thise ensamples speke I by thise men	All these examples I about speak these men
That been untrewe, and nothyng by wommen.	That are untrue, and nothing about women.
For men han evere a likerous appetit	For men have ever a lecherous appetite
On lower thyng to parfourne hire delit	On lower things to perform their delight
Than on hire wyves, be they never so faire,	Than on their wives, be they never so fair,
Ne never so trewe, ne so debonaire.	Nor never so true, nor so gracious.
Flessh is so newefangel, with meschaunce,	Flesh is so fond of novelty, curses on it,
That we ne konne in nothyng han plesaunce	That we can not take pleasure in anything
That sowneth into vertu any while.	That is consonant with virtue for any length of time.
This Phebus, which that thoghte upon no gile,	This Phoebus, who thought upon no guile,
Deceyved was, for al his jolitee.	Deceived was, despite all his attractive qualities.
For under hym another hadde shee,	For under him another had she,
A man of litel reputacioun,	A man of little reputation,
Nat worth to Phebus in comparisoun.	Worth nothing in comparison to Phoebus.
The moore harm is, it happeth ofte so,	The more harm is, it happens often so,
Of which ther cometh muchel harm and wo.	Of which there comes much harm and woe.
And so bifel, whan Phebus was absent,	And so befell, when Phoebus was absent,
His wyf anon hath for hir lemman sent.	His wife immediately has for her sweetheart sent.
Hir lemman? Certes, this is a knavyssh speche!	Her sweetheart? Certes, this is a knavish speech!
Foryeveth it me, and that I yow biseche.	Forgive it me, and that I you beseech.
The wise Plato seith, as ye may rede,	The wise Plato says, as you may read,
The word moot nede accorde with the dede.	The word must by necessity accord with the deed.
If men shal telle proprely a thyng,	If men shall tell a thing properly,
The word moot cosyn be to the werkyng.	The word must be cousin to the deed.
I am a boystous man, right thus seye I:	I am an unlearned man, right thus say I:
Ther nys no difference, trewely,	There is no difference, truly,
Bitwixe a wyf that is of heigh degree,	Between a wife that is of high degree,
If of hir body dishonest she bee,	If of her body dishonest she bee,
And a povre wenche, oother than this --	And a poor wench, other than this --
If it so be they werke bothe amys --	If it so be they work both amiss --
But that the gentile, in estaat above,	Except that the gentle, higher in rank,
She shal be cleped his lady, as in love;	She shall be called his lady, as in love;
And for that oother is a povre womman,	And because that other is a poor woman,
She shal be cleped his wenche or his lemman.	She shall be called his wench or his sweetie.
And, God it woot, myn owene deere brother,	And, God it knows, my own dear brother,
Men leyn that oon as lowe as lith that oother.	Men lay that one as low as lies that other.
Right so bitwixe a titlelees tiraunt	Right so between an usurping tyrant
And an outlawe or a theef erraunt,	And an outlaw or an arrant thief,
The same I seye: ther is no difference.	The same I say: there is no difference.
To Alisaundre was toold this sentence,	To Alexander was told this sentence,
That, for the tirant is of gretter myght	That, because the tyrant is of greater might
By force of meynee for to sleen dounright,	By the size of his army to slay downright,
And brennen hous and hoom, and make al playn,	And burn house and home, and level everything,
Lo, therfore is he cleped a capitayn;	Lo, therefore is he called a captain;
And for the outlawe hath but smal meynee,	And because the outlaw has but a small group of followers,
And may nat doon so greet an harm as he,	And can not do as much harm as he,
Ne brynge a contree to so greet mescheef,	Nor bring a country to such great mischief,
Men clepen hym an outlawe or a theef.	Men call him an outlaw or a thief.
But for I am a man noght textueel,	But because I am not a learned man,
I wol noght telle of textes never a deel;	I will tell nothing of texts, never a bit;
I wol go to my tale, as I bigan.	I will go to my tale, as I began.
Whan Phebus wyf had sent for hir lemman,	When Phoebus wife had sent for her leman,
Anon they wroghten al hire lust volage.	Right away they satisfied all their reckless lust.
The white crowe, that heeng ay in the cage,	The white crow, that hanged always in the cage,
Biheeld hire werk, and seyde never a word.	Beheld their work, and said never a word.
And whan that hoom was come Phebus, the lord,	And when home was come Phoebus, the lord,
This crowe sang "Cokkow! Cokkow! Cokkow!"	This crow sang "Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Cuckoo!"
"What, bryd?" quod Phebus. "What song syngestow?	"What, bird?" said Phoebus. "What song singest thou?
Ne were thow wont so myrily to synge	Were thou not accustomed so merrily to sing
That to myn herte it was a rejoysynge	That to my heart it was a rejoicing
To heere thy voys? Allas, what song is this?"	To hear thy voice? Alas, what song is this?"
"By God," quod he, "I synge nat amys.	"By God," said he, "I sing not amiss.
Phebus," quod he, "for al thy worthynesse,	Phoebus," said he, "for all thy worthiness,
For al thy beautee and thy gentilesse,	For all thy beauty and thy nobility,
For al thy song and al thy mynstralcye,	For all thy song and all thy music,
For al thy waityng, blered is thyn ye	For all thy watching, thou hast been tricked
With oon of litel reputacioun,	By one of little reputation,
Noght worth to thee, as in comparisoun,	Not worth, compared to thee,
The montance of a gnat, so moote I thryve!	The value of a gnat, as I may thrive!
For on thy bed thy wyf I saugh hym swyve."	For on thy bed I saw him copulate with thy wife."
What wol ye moore? The crowe anon hym tolde,	What more do you want? The crow immediately him told,
By sadde tokenes and by wordes bolde,	By clear evidence and by bold words,
How that his wyf had doon hire lecherye,	How his wife had done her lechery,
Hym to greet shame and to greet vileynye,	To his great shame and to his great dishonor,
And tolde hym ofte he saugh it with his yen.	And told him repeatedly he saw it with his eyes.
This Phebus gan aweyward for to wryen,	This Phoebus began to turn away,
And thoughte his sorweful herte brast atwo.	And thought his sorrowful heart would break in two.
His bowe he bente, and sette therinne a flo,	His bow he bent, and set therein an arrow,
And in his ire his wyf thanne hath he slayn.	And in his ire his wife then has he slain.
This is th' effect; ther is namoore to sayn;	This is the substance of it; there is no more to say;
For sorwe of which he brak his mynstralcie,	For sorrow of which he broke his musical instruments,
Bothe harpe, and lute, and gyterne, and sautrie;	Both harp, and lute, and cither, and psaltery;
And eek he brak his arwes and his bowe,	And also he broke his arrows and his bow,
And after that thus spak he to the crowe:	And after that thus spoke he to the crow:
"Traitour," quod he, "with tonge of scorpioun,	"Traitor," said he, "with tongue of scorpion,
Thou hast me broght to my confusioun;	Thou hast me brought to my ruin;
Allas, that I was wroght! Why nere I deed?	Alas, that I was wrought! Why was I not dead?
O deere wyf! O gemme of lustiheed!	O dear wife! O gem of delight!
That were to me so sad and eek so trewe,	Who were to me so stable and also so true,
Now listow deed, with face pale of hewe,	Now liest thou dead, with face pale of hue,
Ful giltelees, that dorste I swere, ywys!	Full guiltless, that dare I swear, indeed!
O rakel hand, to doon so foule amys!	O rash hand, to do so foul a crime!
O trouble wit, O ire recchelees,	O troubled wit, O reckless anger,
That unavysed smyteth gilteles!	That recklessly smites the guiltless!
O wantrust, ful of fals suspecion,	O mistrust, full of false suspicion,
Where was thy wit and thy discrecion?	Where was thy wit and thy discretion?
O every man, be war of rakelnesse!	O every man, beware of rashness!
Ne trowe no thyng withouten strong witnesse.	Do not believe any thing without strong evidence.
Smyt nat to soone, er that ye witen why,	Smite not too soon, before you know why,
And beeth avysed wel and sobrely	And be advised well and soberly
Er ye doon any execucion	Before you act in any way
Upon youre ire for suspecion.	Upon your anger caused by suspicion.
Allas, a thousand folk hath rakel ire	Alas, a thousand folk has rash anger
Fully fordoon, and broght hem in the mire.	Completely undone, and brought them in the mire.
Allas! For sorwe I wol myselven slee!"	Alas! For sorrow I will myself slay!"
And to the crowe, "O false theef!" seyde he,	And to the crow, "O false thief!" said he,
"I wol thee quite anon thy false tale.	"I will pay thee back immediately (for) thy false tale.
Thou songe whilom lyk a nyghtyngale;	Thou once sang like a nightingale;
Now shaltow, false theef, thy song forgon,	Now shalt thou, false thief, give up thy song,
And eek thy white fetheres everichon,	And also thy white feathers every one,
Ne nevere in al thy lif ne shaltou speke.	Nor never in all thy life shalt thou speak.
Thus shal men on a traytour been awreke;	Thus shall men on a traitor be avenged;
Thou and thyn ofspryng evere shul be blake,	Thou and thy offspring ever shall be black,
Ne nevere sweete noyse shul ye make,	Nor never sweet noise shall you make,
But evere crie agayn tempest and rayn,	But ever cry in anticipation of tempest and rain,
In tokenynge that thurgh thee my wyf is slayn."	As a sign that through thee my wife is slain."
And to the crowe he stirte, and that anon,	And to the crow he rushed, and that right away,
And pulled his white fetheres everychon,	And pulled out his white feathers every one,
And made hym blak, and refte hym al his song,	And made him black, and took away all his song,
And eek his speche, and out at dore hym slong	And also his speech, and out the door slung him
Unto the devel, which I hym bitake;	Unto the devil, to whom I commit him;
And for this caas been alle crowes blake.	And because of this case all crows are black.
Lordynges, by this ensample I yow preye,	Gentlemen, by this example I you pray,
Beth war, and taketh kep what that ye seye:	Beware, and take care what you say:
Ne telleth nevere no man in youre lyf	And tell never any man in your life
How that another man hath dight his wyf;	How another man has copulated with his wife;
He wol yow haten mortally, certeyn.	He will hate you mortally, certainly.
Daun Salomon, as wise clerkes seyn,	Dan Salomon, as wise clerks say,
Techeth a man to kepen his tonge weel.	Teaches a man to guard his tongue well.
But, as I seyde, I am noght textueel.	But, as I said, I am not learned.
But nathelees, thus taughte me my dame:	But nonetheless, thus taught me my mother:
"My sone, thenk on the crowe, a Goddes name!	"My son, think on the crow, in God's name!
My sone, keep wel thy tonge, and keep thy freend.	My son, hold well thy tongue, and keep thy friend.
A wikked tonge is worse than a feend;	A wicked tongue is worse than a fiend;
My sone, from a feend men may hem blesse.	My son, from a fiend men can bless themselves.
My sone, God of his endelees goodnesse	My son, God of his endless goodness
Walled a tonge with teeth and lippes eke,	Walled a tongue with teeth and lips also,
For man sholde hym avyse what he speeke.	So that man should think about what he may speak.
My sone, ful ofte, for to muche speche	My son, very often, for too much speech
Hath many a man been spilt, as clerkes teche,	Has many a man been ruined, as clerks teach,
But for litel speche avysely	But for little speech well considered
Is no man shent, to speke generally.	Is no man harmed, to speak generally.
My sone, thy tonge sholdestow restreyne	My son, thy tongue thou should restrain
At alle tymes, but whan thou doost thy peyne	At all times, but when thou make an effort
To speke of God, in honour and preyere.	To speak of God, in honor and prayer.
The firste vertu, sone, if thou wolt leere,	The first virtue, son, if thou will learn,
Is to restreyne and kepe wel thy tonge;	Is to restrain and guard well thy tongue;
Thus lerne children whan that they been yonge.	Thus learn children when they are young.
My sone, of muchel spekyng yvele avysed,	My son, of much ill-considered speaking,
Ther lasse spekyng hadde ynough suffised,	Where less speaking had well enough sufficed,
Comth muchel harm; thus was me toold and taught.	Comes much harm; thus was me told and taught.
In muchel speche synne wanteth naught.	In much speech sin is not lacking.
Wostow wherof a rakel tonge serveth?	Knowest thou what a rash tongue serves for?
Right as a swerd forkutteth and forkerveth	Right as a sword cuts and carves
An arm a-two, my deere sone, right so	An arm in two, my dear son, just so
A tonge kutteth freendshipe al a-two.	A tongue cuts friendship all in two.
A jangler is to God abhomynable.	A tale-teller is to God abominable.
Reed Salomon, so wys and honurable;	Read Salomon, so wise and honorable;
Reed David in his psalmes; reed Senekke.	Read David in his psalms; read Seneca.
My sone, spek nat, but with thyn heed thou bekke.	My son, speak not, but with thy head thou nod.
Dissimule as thou were deef, if that thou heere	Act as if thou were deaf, if thou hear
A janglere speke of perilous mateere.	A tale-teller speak of perilous matter.
The Flemyng seith, and lerne it if thee leste,	The Fleming says, and learn it if thou please,
That litel janglyng causeth muchel reste.	That little tale-telling causes much rest.
My sone, if thou no wikked word hast seyd,	My son, if thou no wicked word hast said,
Thee thar nat drede for to be biwreyd;	Thou need not dread to be betrayed;
But he that hath mysseyd, I dar wel sayn,	But he who has spoken evil, I dare well say,
He may by no wey clepe his word agayn.	He can by no way call his word back.
Thyng that is seyd is seyd, and forth it gooth,	Thing that is said is said, and forth it goes,
Though hym repente, or be hym nevere so looth.	Though he repent, or be ever so unwilling (it be known).
He is his thral to whom that he hath sayd	He is his slave to whom he has said
A tale of which he is now yvele apayd.	A tale of which he is now very sorry.
My sone, be war, and be noon auctour newe	My son, beware, and be no author new
Of tidynges, wheither they been false or trewe.	Of tidings, whether they be false or true.
Whereso thou come, amonges hye or lowe,	Wherever thou come, amongst high or low,
Kepe wel thy tonge and thenk upon the crowe."	Hold well thy tongue and think upon the crow."
The wordes of the Hoost to the compaignye.	The words of the host to the company.
Oure Hooste saugh wel that the brighte sonne	Our Host saw well that the bright sun
The ark of his artificial day hath ronne	The arc of his twelve-hour day has run
The ferthe part, and half an houre and moore,	One fourth, and half an hour and more,
And though he were not depe ystert in loore,	And though he was not far advanced in learning,
He wiste it was the eightetethe day	He knew it was the eighteenth day
Of Aprill, that is messager to May;	Of April, that is messenger to May;
And saugh wel that the shadwe of every tree	And saw well that the shadow of every tree
Was in lengthe the same quantitee	Was in length the same quantity
That was the body erect that caused it.	As was the erect body that caused it.
And therefore by the shadwe he took his wit	And therefore by the shadow he judged
That Phebus, which that shoon so clere and brighte,	That Phoebus, which shone so clear and bright,
Degrees was fyve and fourty clombe on highte,	Five and forty degrees had climbed on height,
And for that day, as in that latitude,	And for that day, in that latitude,
It was ten of the clokke, he gan conclude,	It was ten o'clock, he did conclude,
And sodeynly he plighte his horse aboute.	And suddenly he pulled his horse about.
"Lordynges," quod he, "I warne yow, al this route,	"Gentlemen," said he, "I warn you, all this company,
The fourthe party of this day is gon.	One fourth of this day is gone.
Now for the love of God and of Seint John,	Now for the love of God and of Saint John,
Leseth no tyme, as ferforth as ye may.	Lose no time, insofar as you can.
Lordynges, the tyme wasteth nyght and day,	Gentlemen, the time wastes away night and day,
And steleth from us, what pryvely slepynge,	And steals from us, in part imperceptibly when sleeping,
And what thurgh necligence in oure wakynge,	And in part through negligence when we are awake,
As dooth the streem that turneth nevere agayn,	As does the stream that never turns back,
Descendynge from the mountaigne into playn.	Descending from the mountain into the plain.
Wel kan Senec and many a philosophre	Well can Seneca and many a philosopher
Biwaillen tyme moore than gold in cofre;	Bewail time more than gold in coffer;
For `Los of catel may recovered be,	For `Loss of property may be recovered,
But los of tyme shendeth us,' quod he.	But loss of time ruins us,' said he.
It wol nat come agayn, withouten drede,	It will not come again, without doubt,
Nomoore than wole Malkynes maydenhede,	No more than will Malkin's maidenhead,
Whan she hath lost it in hir wantownesse.	When she has lost it in her wantonness.
Lat us nat mowlen thus in ydelnesse.	Let us not grow moldy thus in idleness.
"Sire Man of Lawe," quod he, "so have ye blis,	"Sir Man of Law," said he, "as you may have bliss,
Telle us a tale anon, as forward is.	Tell us a tale now, as was agreed.
Ye been submytted, thurgh youre free assent,	You have submitted, through your free assent,
To stonden in this cas at my juggement.	To stand in this case at my judgment.
Acquiteth yow now of youre biheeste;	Now fulfill your promise;
Thanne have ye do youre devoir atte leeste."	Then have you done your duty at the least."
"Hooste," quod he, "depardieux, ich assente;	"Host," said he, "in God's name, I assent;
To breke forward is nat myn entente.	To break our agreement is not my intent.
Biheste is dette, and I wole holde fayn	Promise is debt, and I will eagerly keep
Al my biheste, I kan no bettre sayn.	All my promise, I can say no better.
For swich lawe as a man yeveth another wight,	For such law as a man gives another person,
He sholde hymselven usen it, by right;	He should himself use it, by right;
Thus wole oure text. But nathelees, certeyn,	Thus our text will have it. But nonetheless, certainly,
I kan right now no thrifty tale seyn	Right now I can tell no suitable tale
That Chaucer, thogh he kan but lewedly	That Chaucer, though he is ignorant
On metres and on rymyng craftily,	Of meters and of riming craftily,
Hath seyd hem in swich Englissh as he kan	Has (not already) said them in such English as he knows
Of olde tyme, as knoweth many a man;	Long ago, as knows many a man;
And if he have noght seyd hem, leve brother,	And if he has not said them, dear brother,
In o book, he hath seyd hem in another.	In one book, he has said them in another.
For he hath toold of loveris up and doun	For he has told of lovers up and down
Mo than Ovide made of mencioun	More than Ovid made mention of
In his Episteles, that been ful olde.	In his Epistles, that are very old.
What sholde I tellen hem, syn they been tolde?	Why should I tell them, since they have been told?
"In youthe he made of Ceys and Alcione,	"In youth he wrote about Ceyx and Alcion,
And sitthen hath he spoken of everichone,	And since has he spoken of each one,
Thise noble wyves and thise loveris eke.	These noble wives and these lovers also.
Whoso that wole his large volume seke,	Whoever will seek his large volume,
Cleped the Seintes Legende of Cupide,	Called the Saints' Legend of Cupid,
Ther may he seen the large woundes wyde	There may he see the large wounds wide
Of Lucresse, and of Babilan Tesbee;	Of Lucretia, and Thisbe of Babylon;
The swerd of Dido for the false Enee;	The sword of Dido (used) because of the false Aeneas;
The tree of Phillis for hire Demophon;	The tree of Phyllis for her Demophon;
The pleinte of Dianire and of Hermyon,	The complaint of Deianire and of Hermione,
Of Adriane, and of Isiphilee --	Of Ariadne, and of Hypsipyle --
The bareyne yle stondynge in the see --	The barren isle standing in the sea --
The dreynte Leandre for his Erro;	The drowned Leander for his Hero;
The teeris of Eleyne, and eek the wo	The tears of Helen, and also the woe
Of Brixseyde, and of the, Ladomya;	Of Briseis, and of thee, Laodamia;
The crueltee of the, queene Medea,	The cruelty of thee, queen Medea,
Thy litel children hangynge by the hals,	Thy little children hanging by the neck,
For thy Jason, that was of love so fals!	Because of thy Jason, that was in love so false!
O Ypermystra, Penelopee, Alceste,	O Hypermnestra, Penelope, Alcestis,
Youre wifhod he comendeth with the beste!	Your wifehood he commends with the best!
"But certeinly no word ne writeth he	"But certainly no word writes he
Of thilke wikke ensample of Canacee,	Of that wicked example of Canace,
That loved hir owene brother synfully --	Who loved her own brother sinfully --
Of swiche cursed stories I sey fy! --	Of such cursed stories I say fie! --
Or ellis of Tyro Appollonius,	Or else of Apollonius of Tyre,
How that the cursed kyng Antiochus	How that the cursed king Antiochus
Birafte his doghter of hir maydenhede,	Deprived his daughter of her maidenhead,
That is so horrible a tale for to rede,	That is so horrible a tale to read,
Whan he hir threw upon the pavement.	When he threw her upon the pavement.
And therfore he, of ful avysement,	And therefore he, after careful consideration
Nolde nevere write in none of his sermons	Would never write in any of his compositions
Of swiche unkynde abhomynacions,	Of such unnatural abominations,
Ne I wol noon reherce, if that I may.	Nor will I tell any such, if that I may.
"But of my tale how shal I doon this day?	"But of my tale what shall I do this day?
Me were looth be likned, doutelees,	I would hate to be likened, doubtless,
To Muses that men clepe Pierides --	To the Muses that men call Pierides --
Methamorphosios woot what I mene;	Metamorphoses shows what I mean;
But nathelees, I recche noght a bene	But nonetheless, I reckon it not worth a bean
Though I come after hym with hawebake.	Though I come after him with a humble dish.
I speke in prose, and lat him rymes make."	I speak in prose, and let him make rhymes."
And with that word he, with a sobre cheere,	And with that word he, with a solemn demeanor,
Bigan his tale, as ye shal after heere.	Began his tale, as you shall after hear.
The Prologe of the Mannes Tale of Law	The Prologue of the Man's Tale of Law
O hateful harm, condicion of poverte!	O hateful harm, condition of poverty!
With thurst, with coold, with hunger so confoundid!	By thirst, by cold, by hunger so distressed!
To asken help thee shameth in thyn herte;	To ask help thou art ashamed in thy heart;
If thou noon aske, with nede artow so woundid	If thou ask for none, thou art so wounded by need
That verray nede unwrappeth al thy wounde hid!	That true need reveals all thy hidden wound!
Maugree thyn heed, thou most for indigence	Despite all you can do, thou must for indigence
Or stele, or begge, or borwe thy despence!	Either steal, or beg, or borrow thy living expenses!
Thow blamest Crist and seist ful bitterly	Thou blamest Christ and sayest full bitterly
He mysdeparteth richesse temporal;	He wrongly allots temporal riches;
Thy neighebor thou wytest synfully,	Thy neighbor thou blamest sinfully,
And seist thou hast to lite and he hath al.	And sayest thou hast too little and he has all.
"Parfay," seistow, "somtyme he rekene shal,	"By my faith," sayest thou, "sometimes he shall pay for it,
Whan that his tayl shal brennen in the gleede,	When his tail shall burn in the live coals,
For he noght helpeth needfulle in hir neede."	For he helps not the needy in their need."
Herkne what is the sentence of the wise:	Listen to what is the opinion of the wise:
"Bet is to dyen than have indigence";	"Better it is to die than to have poverty";
"Thy selve neighebor wol thee despise."	"Thy very neighbor will despise thee."
If thou be povre, farwel thy reverence!	If thou be poor, farewell thy reverence!
Yet of the wise man take this sentence:	Yet of the wise man take this advice:
"Alle the dayes of povre men been wikke."	"All the days of poor men are painful."
Be war, therfore, er thou come to that prikke!	Beware, therefore, before thou come to that point!
If thou be povre, thy brother hateth thee,	If thou be poor, thy brother hates thee,
And alle thy freendes fleen from thee, allas!	And all thy friends flee from thee, alas!
O riche marchauntz, ful of wele been yee,	O rich merchants, full of prosperity are you,
O noble, o prudent folk, as in this cas!	O noble, o prudent folk, in such a case as this!
Youre bagges been nat fild with ambes as,	Your bags are not filled with double aces (a losing throw in dice),
But with sys cynk, that renneth for youre chaunce;	But with six five, that is your winning number;
At Cristemasse myrie may ye daunce!	At Christmas merrily may you dance!
Ye seken lond and see for yowre wynnynges;	You seek land and sea for your winnings;
As wise folk ye knowen al th' estaat	As wise folk you know all the condition
Of regnes; ye been fadres of tidynges	Of (foreign) lands; you are fathers of tidings
And tales, bothe of pees and of debaat.	And tales, both of peace and of war.
I were right now of tales desolaat,	I would right now be without any tales,
Nere that a marchant, goon is many a yeere,	Were it not that a merchant, gone by is many a year,
Me taughte a tale, which that ye shal heere.	Taught me a tale, which you shall hear.
Heere begynneth the Man of Lawe his tale.	Here begins the tale of the Man of Law.
In Surrye whilom dwelte a compaignye	In Syria once dwelt a company
Of chapmen riche, and therto sadde and trewe,	Of rich merchants, and moreover trustworthy and true,
That wyde-where senten hir spicerye,	That wherever they sent their oriental goods,
Clothes of gold, and satyns riche of hewe.	Cloth of gold, and satins rich in color.
Hir chaffare was so thrifty and so newe	Their merchandise was so serviceable and so novel
That every wight hath deyntee to chaffare	That every person has desire to trade
With hem, and eek to sellen hem hire ware.	With them, and also to sell them their goods.
Now fil it that the maistres of that sort	Now it happened that the masters of that company
Han shapen hem to Rome for to wende;	Have prepared themselves to travel to Rome;
Were it for chapmanhod or for disport,	Were it for business or for pleasure,
Noon oother message wolde they thider sende,	No other messenger would they thither send,
But comen hemself to Rome; this is the ende.	But came themselves to Rome; this is the sum of it.
And in swich place as thoughte hem avantage	And in such a place as they thought advantageous
For hire entente, they take hir herbergage.	For their purposes, they take their lodging.
Sojourned han thise merchantz in that toun	These merchants have sojourned in that town
A certein tyme, as fil to hire plesance.	A certain length of time, as accorded with their desires.
And so bifel that th' excellent renoun	And it so happened that the excellent renown
Of the Emperoures doghter, dame Custance,	Of the Emperor's daughter, Lady Custance,
Reported was, with every circumstance,	Was reported, in full detail,
Unto thise Surryen marchantz in swich wyse,	Unto these Syrian merchants in such a manner,
Fro day to day, as I shal yow devyse.	From day to day, as I shall tell you.
This was the commune voys of every man:	This was the common opinion of every man:
"Oure Emperour of Rome -- God hym see! --	"Our Emperor of Rome -- may God look after him! --
A doghter hath that, syn the world bigan,	A daughter has that, since the world began,
To rekene as wel hir goodnesse as beautee,	To consider as well her goodness as beauty,
Nas nevere swich another as is shee.	There was never such another as is she.
I prey to God in honour hire susteene,	I pray to God to sustain her in honor,
And wolde she were of al Europe the queene.	And would she were of all Europe the queen.
"In hire is heigh beautee, withoute pride,	"In her is great beauty, without pride,
Yowthe, withoute grenehede or folye;	Youth, without immaturity or folly;
To alle hire werkes vertu is hir gyde;	In all her deeds virtue is her guide;
Humblesse hath slayn in hire al tirannye.	Humility has slain in her all tyranny.
She is mirour of alle curteisye;	She is mirror of all courtesy;
Hir herte is verray chambre of hoolynesse,	Her heart is a true chamber of holiness,
Hir hand, ministre of fredam for almesse."	Her hand, minister of generosity in giving alms."
And al this voys was sooth, as God is trewe.	And all this opinion was true, as God is true.
But now to purpos lat us turne agayn.	But now to the point let us turn again.
Thise marchantz han doon fraught hir shippes newe,	These merchants have had their ships newly loaded,
And whan they han this blisful mayden sayn,	And when they have this blissful maiden seen,
Hoom to Surrye been they went ful fayn,	Home to Syria they have gone very happily,
And doon hir nedes as they han doon yoore,	And they conduct their business as they have done for years,
And lyven in wele; I kan sey yow namoore.	And live in prosperity; I can tell you no more.
Now fil it that thise marchantz stode in grace	Now it happened that these merchants stood in the good graces
Of hym that was the Sowdan of Surrye;	Of him that was the Sultan of Syria;
For whan they cam from any strange place,	For when they came from any foreign place,
He wolde, of his benigne curteisye,	He would, of his gracious courtesy,
Make hem good chiere, and bisily espye	Entertain them well, and busily seek out
Tidynges of sondry regnes, for to leere	News from various countries, to learn
The wondres that they myghte seen or heere.	The wonders that they could have seen or heard.
Amonges othere thynges, specially,	Amongst other things, specially,
Thise marchantz han hym toold of dame Custance	These merchants have told him of Lady Custance
So greet noblesse in ernest, ceriously,	Such great noble qualities in earnest, in detail,
That this Sowdan hath caught so greet plesance	That this Sultan has caught such great desire
To han hir figure in his remembrance,	To have her figure in his remembrance,
That al his lust and al his bisy cure	That all his desire and all his intense concern
Was for to love hire while his lyf may dure.	Was to love her while his life may endure.
Paraventure in thilke large book	Perhaps in that large book
Which that men clepe the hevene ywriten was	Which men call the heaven was written
With sterres, whan that he his birthe took,	In stars, when he was born,
That he for love sholde han his deeth, allas!	That he because of love should have his death, alas!
For in the sterres, clerer than is glas,	For in the stars, clearer than is glass,
Is writen, God woot, whoso koude it rede,	Is written, God knows, whoever could read it,
The deeth of every man, withouten drede.	The death of every man, without doubt.
In sterres, many a wynter therbiforn,	In stars, many a winter before then,
Was writen the deeth of Ector, Achilles,	Was written the death of Hector, Achilles,
Of Pompei, Julius, er they were born;	Of Pompey, Julius, before they were born;
The strif of Thebes; and of Ercules,	The strife of Thebes; and of Hercules,
Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates	Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
The deeth; but mennes wittes ben so dulle	The death; but men's wits are so dull
That no wight kan wel rede it atte fulle.	That no person can well interpret it fully.
This Sowdan for his privee conseil sente,	This Sultan for his privy council sent,
And, shortly of this matiere for to pace,	And, to pass briefly over this matter,
He hath to hem declared his entente,	He has to them declared his intent,
And seyde hem, certein, but he myghte have grace	And said to them, certainly, unless he could have the good fortune
To han Custance withinne a litel space,	To have Custance within a little time,
He nas but deed; and charged hem in hye	He was as good as dead; and ordered them hastily
To shapen for his lyf som remedye.	To arrange some remedy to save his life .
Diverse men diverse thynges seyden;	Different men said different things;
They argumenten, casten up and doun;	They argue, consider alternatives;
Many a subtil resoun forth they leyden;	Many a subtle argument they laid forth;
They speken of magyk and abusioun.	They speak of magic and deception.
But finally, as in conclusioun,	But finally, in conclusion,
They kan nat seen in that noon avantage,	They can not see any advantage in that,
Ne in noon oother wey, save mariage.	Nor in any other way, save for marriage.
Thanne sawe they therinne swich difficultee	Then saw they in that such difficulty
By wey of reson, for to speke al playn,	By way of reason, to speak all plainly,
By cause that ther was swich diversitee	Because there was such difference
Bitwene hir bothe lawes, that they sayn	Between their two religions, that they say
They trowe that no "Cristen prince wolde fayn	They suppose that no "Christian prince would be willing
Wedden his child under oure lawe sweete	To wed his child under our sweet religion
That us was taught by Mahoun, oure prophete."	That was taught us by Mohammed, our prophet."
And he answerde, "Rather than I lese	And he answered, "Rather than I lose
Custance, I wol be cristned, doutelees.	Custance, I will be christened, doubtless.
I moot been hires; I may noon oother chese.	I must be hers; I can choose no other.
I prey yow hoold youre argumentz in pees;	I pray you to keep your arguments silent;
Saveth my lyf, and beth noght recchelees	Save my life, and be not negligent
To geten hire that hath my lyf in cure,	To get her who has my life in her keeping,
For in this wo I may nat longe endure."	For in this woe I can not long endure."
What nedeth gretter dilatacioun?	What needs greater increase of words?
I seye, by tretys and embassadrie,	I say, by treaty and negotiation,
And by the popes mediacioun,	And by the pope's mediation,
And al the chirche, and al the chivalrie,	And all the church, and all the knights,
That in destruccioun of mawmettrie,	That for the destruction of idolatry,
And in encrees of Cristes lawe deere,	And for the increase of Christ's dear law,
They been acorded, so as ye shal heere:	They are agreed, as you shall hear:
How that the Sowdan and his baronage	That the Sultan and his baronage
And alle his liges sholde ycristned be,	And all his vassals should christened be,
And he shal han Custance in mariage,	And he shall have Custance in marriage,
And certein gold, I noot what quantitee;	And a certain amount of gold, I do not know how much;
And heer-to founden sufficient suretee.	And for this provided sufficient pledges.
This same accord was sworn on eyther syde;	This same agreement was sworn on either side;
Now, faire Custance, almyghty God thee gyde!	Now, fair Custance, almighty God thee guide!
Now wolde som men waiten, as I gesse,	Now would some men expect, as I guess,
That I sholde tellen al the purveiance	That I should tell all the preparations
That th' Emperour, of his grete noblesse,	That the Emperor, of his great nobility,
Hath shapen for his doghter, dame Custance.	Has arranged for his daughter, Lady Custance.
Wel may men knowen that so greet ordinance	Well may men know that such great preparation
May no man tellen in a litel clause	No man can tell in a brief statement
As was arrayed for so heigh a cause.	As was provided for so important an occasion.
Bisshopes been shapen with hire for to wende,	Bishops are appointed to go with her,
Lordes, ladies, knyghtes of renoun,	Lords, ladies, knights of renown,
And oother folk ynowe; this is th' ende;	And other folk enough; this is the sum of it;
And notified is thurghout the toun	And it is made known throughout the town
That every wight, with greet devocioun,	That every person, with great devotion,
Sholde preyen Crist that he this mariage	Should pray Christ that He this marriage
Receyve in gree and spede this viage.	Receive favorably and lend success to this voyage.
The day is comen of hir departynge;	The day is come of her departure;
I seye, the woful day fatal is come,	I say, the woeful fatal day is come,
That ther may be no lenger tariynge,	That there may be no longer tarrying,
But forthward they hem dressen, alle and some.	But to go forth they prepare themselves, one and all.
Custance, that was with sorwe al overcome,	Custance, that was with sorrow all overcome,
Ful pale arist, and dresseth hire to wende;	Full pale arises, and prepares herself to go;
For wel she seeth ther is noon oother ende.	For well she sees there is no other possible conclusion.
Allas, what wonder is it thogh she wepte,	Alas, what wonder is it though she wept,
That shal be sent to strange nacioun	She who shall be sent to a foreign nation
Fro freendes that so tendrely hire kepte,	From friends who so tenderly cared for her,
And to be bounden under subjeccioun	And to be bound under subjection
Of oon, she knoweth nat his condicioun?	By one, (of whom) she knows not his character?
Housbondes been alle goode, and han ben yoore;	Husbands are all good, and have been for years;
That knowen wyves; I dar sey yow na moore.	Wives know that; I dare say you no more.
"Fader," she seyde, "thy wrecched child Custance,	"Father," she said, "thy wretched child Custance,
Thy yonge doghter fostred up so softe,	Thy young daughter fostered up so tenderly,
And ye, my mooder, my soverayn plesance	And you, my mother, my greatest joy
Over alle thyng, out-taken Crist on-lofte,	Over all things, except Christ above,
Custance youre child hire recomandeth ofte	Custance your child commends herself often
Unto youre grace, for I shal to Surrye,	Unto your grace, for I must go to Syria,
Ne shal I nevere seen yow moore with ye.	Nor shall I never see you again with my eyes.
"Allas, unto the Barbre nacioun	"Alas, unto the pagan world
I moste anoon, syn that it is youre wille;	I must go right now, since it is your will;
But Crist, that starf for our redempcioun	But Christ, that died for our redemption
So yeve me grace his heestes to fulfille!	Give me grace his commands to fulfill!
I, wrecche womman, no fors though I spille!	I, wretched woman, no matter though I die!
Wommen are born to thraldom and penance,	Women are born to servitude and suffering,
And to been under mannes governance."	And to be under man's governance."
I trowe at Troye, whan Pirrus brak the wal	I believe at Troy, when Pirrus broke the wall
Or Ilion brende, at Thebes the citee,	Before Ilion burned, at Thebes the city,
N' at Rome, for the harm thurgh Hanybal	Nor at Rome, for the harm wrought by Hannibal
That Romayns hath venquysshed tymes thre,	Who has vanquished Romans three times,
Nas herd swich tendre wepyng for pitee	Was not heard such tender weeping for pity
As in the chambre was for hire departynge;	As in the chamber was for her departing;
But forth she moot, wher-so she wepe or synge.	But forth she must go, whether she weeps or sings.
O firste moevyng! Crueel firmament,	O first moving! Cruel firmament,
With thy diurnal sweigh that crowdest ay	With thy daily motion that pushes ever
And hurlest al from est til occident	And hurls all from east to west
That naturelly wolde holde another way,	That naturally would go the other way,
Thy crowdyng set the hevene in swich array	Thy impetus set the heaven in such an arrangement
At the bigynnyng of this fiers viage,	At the beginning of this dangerous voyage,
That crueel Mars hath slayn this mariage.	That cruel Mars has slain this marriage.
Infortunat ascendent tortuous,	Unfortunate ascending oblique house, [see n.]
Of which the lord is helplees falle, allas,	From which the lord, helpless, has fallen, alas,
Out of his angle into the derkeste hous!	Out of his angle into the most unfavorable house!
O Mars, o atazir, as in this cas!	O Mars, o dominant planet, in this case!
O fieble moone, unhappy been thy paas!	O feeble moon, unhappy are thy steps!
Thou knyttest thee ther thou art nat receyved;	Thou join thyself where thou art not (well) received;
Ther thou were weel, fro thennes artow weyved.	Where thou were well, from thence art thou driven away.
Imprudent Emperour of Rome, allas!	Imprudent Emperor of Rome, alas!
Was ther no philosophre in al thy toun?	Was there no astrologer in all thy town?
Is no tyme bet than oother in swich cas?	Is no time better than another in such a case?
Of viage is ther noon eleccioun,	For voyages is there no choice of a favorable time,
Namely to folk of heigh condicioun?	Especially for folk of noble social status?
Noght whan a roote is of a burthe yknowe?	Not when an exact date of a birth is known?
Allas, we been to lewed or to slowe!	Alas, we are too ignorant or too slow in wit!
To shippe is brought this woful faire mayde	To ship is brought this woeful fair maid
Solempnely, with every circumstance.	Solemnly, with every ceremony.
"Now Jhesu Crist be with yow alle!" she sayde;	"Now Jesus Christ be with you all!" she said;
Ther nys namoore, but "Farewel, faire Custance!"	There is no more, but "Farewell, fair Custance!"
She peyneth hire to make good contenance;	She takes pains to make a cheerful appearance;
And forth I lete hire saille in this manere,	And forth I let her sail in this manner,
And turne I wole agayn to my matere.	And turn I will again to my subject matter.
The mooder of the Sowdan, welle of vices,	The mother of the Sultan, well of vices,
Espied hath hir sones pleyn entente,	Espied has her son's full intention,
How he wol lete his olde sacrifices;	How he will leave his old sacrifices;
And right anon she for hir conseil sente,	And right away she sent for her council,
And they been come to knowe what she mente.	And they are come to know what she intended.
And whan assembled was this folk in-feere,	And when this folk was assembled together,
She sette hire doun, and seyde as ye shal heere.	She set herself down, and said as you shall hear.
"Lordes," quod she, "ye knowen everichon,	"Lords," said she, "you know each one of you,
How that my sone in point is for to lete	How my son is about to forsake
The hooly lawes of our Alkaron,	The holy laws of our Koran,
Yeven by Goddes message Makomete.	Given by God's messenger Mohammed.
But oon avow to grete God I heete,	But one vow to great God I promise,
The lyf shal rather out of my body sterte	The life shall rather out of my body go
Or Makometes lawe out of myn herte!	Before Mohammed's law (goes) out of my heart!
"What sholde us tyden of this newe lawe	"What should come to us from this new religion
But thraldom to oure bodies and penance,	Except slavery to our bodies and suffering,
And afterward in helle to be drawe,	And afterward to be dragged into hell,
For we reneyed Mahoun oure creance?	Because we renounced our faith in Mohammed?
But, lordes, wol ye maken assurance,	But, lords, will you make assurance,
As I shal seyn, assentynge to my loore,	As I shall say, assenting to my teaching,
And I shal make us sauf for everemoore?"	And I shall make us safe for evermore?"
They sworen and assenten, every man,	They swore and agree, every man,
To lyve with hire and dye, and by hire stonde,	To live with her and die, and by her stand,
And everich, in the beste wise he kan,	And every one, in the best way he can,
To strengthen hire shal alle his frendes fonde;	To strengthen her shall try (to persuade) all his friends;
And she hath this emprise ytake on honde,	And she has this enterprise taken in hand,
Which ye shal heren that I shal devyse,	Which you shall hear as I shall tell,
And to hem alle she spak right in this wyse:	And to them all she spoke right in this manner:
"We shul first feyne us cristendom to take --	"We shall first pretend to receive Christendom --
Coold water shal nat greve us but a lite! --	Cold water shall not grieve us but a little! --
And I shal swich a feeste and revel make	And I shall such a feast and revel make
That, as I trowe, I shal the Sowdan quite.	That, as I believe, I shall pay back the Sultan.
For thogh his wyf be cristned never so white,	For though his wife be christened never so white,
She shal have nede to wasshe awey the rede,	She shall have need to wash away the red,
Thogh she a font-ful water with hire lede."	Though she a baptismal font full of water bring with her."
O Sowdanesse, roote of iniquitee!	O Sultaness, root of iniquity!
Virago, thou Semyrame the secounde!	Virago, thou Semiramis the second!
O serpent under femynynytee,	O serpent under (cover of) femininity,
Lik to the serpent depe in helle ybounde!	Like the serpent deep in hell bound!
O feyned womman, al that may confounde	O feigned woman, that can destroy all
Vertu and innocence, thurgh thy malice,	Virtue and innocence, through thy malice,
Is bred in thee, as nest of every vice!	That is bred in thee, nest of every vice!
O Sathan, envious syn thilke day	O Satan, envious since that same day
That thou were chaced from oure heritage,	That thou were chased from our heritage,
Wel knowestow to wommen the olde way!	Well knowest thou the old way to women!
Thou madest Eva brynge us in servage;	Thou madest Eva bring us into slavery;
Thou wolt fordoon this Cristen mariage.	Thou wilt destroy this Christian marriage.
Thyn instrument so -- weylawey the while! --	Thy instrument thus -- alas the times! --
Makestow of wommen, whan thou wolt bigile.	Makest thou of women, when thou wilt deceive.
This Sowdanesse, whom I thus blame and warye,	This Sultaness, whom I thus blame and curse,
Leet prively hire conseil goon hire way.	Privately had her council go their way.
What sholde I in this tale lenger tarye?	Why should I in this tale longer tarry?
She rydeth to the Sowdan on a day,	She rides to the Sultan on a day,
And seyde hym that she wolde reneye hir lay,	And said to him that she would renounce her religion,
And cristendom of preestes handes fonge,	And take Christendom from a priest's hands,
Repentynge hire she hethen was so longe,	Repenting that she heathen was so long,
Bisechynge hym to doon hire that honour,	Beseeching him to do her that honor,
That she moste han the Cristen folk to feeste --	That she might have the Christian folk to feast --
"To plesen hem I wol do my labour."	"To please them I will work hard."
The Sowdan seith, "I wol doon at youre heeste,"	The Sultan says, "I will act according to your command."
And knelynge thanketh hire of that requeste.	And kneeling thanks her for that request.
So glad he was, he nyste what to seye.	So glad he was, he knew not what to say.
She kiste hir sone, and hoom she gooth hir weye.	She kissed her son, and home she goes her way.
Arryved been this Cristen folk to londe	This Christian folk have come to land
In Surrye, with a greet solempne route,	In Syria, with a great solemn company,
And hastifliche this Sowdan sente his sonde	And hastily this Sultan sent his messenger
First to his mooder, and al the regne aboute,	First to his mother, and all the reign about,
And seyde his wyf was comen, out of doute,	And said his wife was come, without doubt,
And preyde hire for to ryde agayn the queene,	And prayed her to ride to meet the queen,
The honour of his regne to susteene.	The honor of his reign to sustain.
Greet was the prees, and riche was th' array	Large was the crowd, and rich was the assembly
Of Surryens and Romayns met yfeere;	Of Syrians and Romans met together;
The mooder of the Sowdan, riche and gay,	The mother of the Sultan, richly dressed and gay,
Receyveth hire with also glad a cheere	Receives her with as glad a demeanor
As any mooder myghte hir doghter deere,	As any mother might have for her daughter dear,
And to the nexte citee ther bisyde	And to the nearest city there beside
A softe paas solempnely they ryde.	At a slow pace solemnly they ride.
Noght trowe I the triumphe of Julius,	I do not believe the triumph of Julius,
Of which that Lucan maketh swich a boost,	Of which Lucan makes such a boastful account,
Was roialler ne moore curius	Was more royal nor more splendid
Than was th' assemblee of this blisful hoost.	Than was the assembly of this blissful host.
But this scorpioun, this wikked goost,	But this scorpion, this wicked spirit,
The Sowdanesse, for al hire flaterynge,	The Sultaness, for all her flattering,
Caste under this ful mortally to stynge.	Planned, under cover of this, very mortally to sting.
The Sowdan comth hymself soone after this	The Sultan comes himself soon after this
So roially that wonder is to telle,	So royally that it is a wonder to tell,
And welcometh hire with alle joye and blis.	And welcomes her with all joy and bliss.
And thus in murthe and joye I lete hem dwelle;	And thus in mirth and joy I let them remain;
The fruyt of this matiere is that I telle.	The essential part of this matter is what I tell.
Whan tyme cam, men thoughte it for the beste	When time came, men thought it for the best
That revel stynte, and men goon to hir reste.	That revel should stint, and people go to their rest.
The tyme cam, this olde Sowdanesse	The time having come, this old Sultaness
Ordeyned hath this feeste of which I tolde,	Has arranged this feast of which I told,
And to the feeste Cristen folk hem dresse	And to the feast Christian folk go
In general, ye, bothe yonge and olde.	All together, yes, both young and old.
Heere may men feeste and roialtee biholde,	Here may men behold feasting and royalty,
And deyntees mo than I kan yow devyse;	And dainties more than I can tell you;
But al to deere they boghte it er they ryse.	But all too dear they paid for it before they rise (from the feast).
O sodeyn wo, that evere art successour	O sudden woe, that ever art successor
To worldly blisse, spreynd with bitternesse,	To worldly bliss, sprinkled with bitterness,
The ende of the joye of oure worldly labour!	The end of the joy of our worldly labor!
Wo occupieth the fyn of oure gladnesse.	Woe takes over at the end of our gladness.
Herke this conseil for thy sikernesse:	Hearken to this counsel for thy safety:
Upon thy glade day have in thy mynde	Upon thy glad day have in thy mind
The unwar wo or harm that comth bihynde.	The unexpected woe or harm that follows.
For shortly for to tellen, at o word,	For shortly to tell, at one word,
The Sowdan and the Cristen everichone	The Sultan and the Christians each one
Been al tohewe and stiked at the bord,	Are all hacked to pieces and stabbed at the table,
But it were oonly dame Custance allone.	Except for only Lady Custance alone.
This olde Sowdanesse, cursed krone,	This old Sultaness, cursed crone,
Hath with hir freendes doon this cursed dede,	Has with her friends done this cursed deed,
For she hirself wolde al the contree lede.	For she herself wanted to rule all the country.
Ne ther was Surryen noon that was converted,	Nor there was any Syrian that was converted,
That of the conseil of the Sowdan woot,	Who knew of the counsel of the Sultan (followed his advice),
That he nas al tohewe er he asterted.	Who was not all hacked to pieces before he could escape.
And Custance han they take anon, foot-hoot,	And Custance have they taken right then, immediately,
And in a ship al steerelees, God woot,	And in a ship entirely without a rudder, God knows,
They han hir set, and bidde hire lerne saille	They have set her, and told her to learn to sail
Out of Surrye agaynward to Ytaille.	Out of Syria back to Italy.
A certein tresor that she thider ladde,	A certain amount of treasure that she brought there,
And, sooth to seyn, vitaille greet plentee	And, to say the truth, a great store of provisions
They han hire yeven, and clothes eek she hadde,	They have given her, and clothes also she had,
And forth she sailleth in the salte see.	And forth she sails in the salt see.
O my Custance, ful of benignytee,	O my Custance, full of goodness,
O Emperoures yonge doghter deere,	O Emperor's young daughter dear,
He that is lord of Fortune be thy steere!	He that is lord of Fortune be thy rudder!
She blesseth hire, and with ful pitous voys	She blesses herself, and with full pitiful voice
Unto the croys of Crist thus seyde she:	Unto the cross of Christ thus said she:
"O cleere, o welful auter, hooly croys,	"O clear, o blessed altar, holy cross,
Reed of the Lambes blood ful of pitee,	Red with the blood of the Lamb full of pity,
That wessh the world fro the olde iniquitee,	That washed the world from the old iniquity,
Me fro the feend and fro his clawes kepe,	Keep me from the fiend and from his claws,
That day that I shal drenchen in the depe.	That day that I shall drown in the deep.
"Victorious tree, proteccioun of trewe,	"Victorious tree, protection of true (believers),
That oonly worthy were for to bere	That alone was worthy to bear
The Kyng of Hevene with his woundes newe,	The King of Heaven with his fresh wounds,
The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spere,	The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spear,
Flemere of feendes out of hym and here	Banisher of fiends out of man and woman
On which thy lymes feithfully extenden,	Over which thy limbs faithfully extend,
Me kepe, and yif me myght my lyf t' amenden."	Guard me, and give me power my life to amend."
Yeres and dayes fleet this creature	Years and days floated this creature
Thurghout the See of Grece unto the Strayte	Throughout the Sea of Greece unto the Strait
Of Marrok, as it was hire aventure.	Of Gibraltar, as it was her lot.
On many a sory meel now may she bayte;	On many a sorry meal now may she feed;
After hir deeth ful often may she wayte,	Full often may she expect her death,
Er that the wilde wawes wol hire dryve	Before the wild waves will drive her
Unto the place ther she shal arryve.	Unto the place where she shall come to land.
Men myghten asken why she was nat slayn	Men might ask why she was not slain
Eek at the feeste? Who myghte hir body save?	Also at the feast? Who could save her body?
And I answere to that demande agayn,	And I answer to that question in reply,
Who saved Danyel in the horrible cave	Who saved Daniel in the horrible cave
Ther every wight save he, maister and knave,	Where every person except for him, master and servant,
Was with the leon frete er he asterte?	Was devoured by the lion before he could escape?
No wight but God that he bar in his herte.	No one but God Whom he bore in his heart.
God liste to shewe his wonderful myracle	God wanted to show his wonderful miracle
In hire, for we sholde seen his myghty werkis;	In her, so that we should see his mighty works;
Crist, which that is to every harm triacle,	Christ, Who is a medicine for every harm,
By certeine meenes ofte, as knowen clerkis,	By certain means often, as know clerks,
Dooth thyng for certein ende that ful derk is	Does something for a certain reason that is very obscure
To mannes wit, that for oure ignorance	To man's understanding, which, because of our ignorance,
Ne konne noght knowe his prudent purveiance.	Can not know His prudent foresight.
Now sith she was nat at the feeste yslawe,	Now since she was not slain at the feast,
Who kepte hire fro the drenchyng in the see?	Who kept her from the drowning in the sea?
Who kepte Jonas in the fisshes mawe	Who kept Jonas in the fish's maw
Til he was spouted up at Nynyvee?	Until he was spouted up at Nineveh?
Wel may men knowe it was no wight but he	Well may men know it was no one but He
That kepte peple Ebrayk from hir drenchynge,	Who kept the Hebrew people from their drowning,
With drye feet thurghout the see passynge.	With dry feet through the sea passing.
Who bad the foure spirites of tempest	Who commanded the four spirits of tempest
That power han t' anoyen lond and see,	That have power to harm land and sea,
Bothe north and south, and also west and est,	Both north and south, and also west and east,
"Anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree"?	"Harm neither sea, nor land, nor tree"?
Soothly, the comandour of that was he	Truly, the commander of that was He
That fro the tempest ay this womman kepte	Who from the tempest always this woman guarded
As wel whan she wook as whan she slepte.	As well when she woke as when she slept.
Where myghte this womman mete and drynke have	Where could this woman have food and drink
Thre yeer and moore? How lasteth hire vitaille?	Three years and more? How lasts her store of provisions?
Who fedde the Egipcien Marie in the cave,	Who fed the Egyptian Mary in the cave,
Or in desert? No wight but Crist, sanz faille.	Or in desert? No person but Christ, without doubt.
Fyve thousand folk it was as greet mervaille	It was as great marvel five thousand folk
With loves fyve and fisshes two to feede.	To feed with five loaves and two fish.
God sente his foyson at hir grete neede.	God sent his plenty at their great need.
She dryveth forth into oure occian	She drives forth into our ocean
Thurghout oure wilde see, til atte laste	Throughout our wild sea, until at the last
Under an hoold that nempnen I ne kan,	Next to a castle that I can not name,
Fer in Northhumberlond the wawe hire caste,	Far in Northumberland the waves cast her,
And in the sond hir ship stiked so faste	And in the sand her ship stuck so fast
That thennes wolde it noght of al a tyde;	That thence it would not (move) for the duration of an entire tide;
The wyl of Crist was that she sholde abyde.	The will of Christ was that she should remain there.
The constable of the castel doun is fare	The constable of the castle down has come
To seen this wrak, and al the ship he soghte,	To see this wreck, and all the ship he searched,
And foond this wery womman ful of care;	And found this weary woman full of care;
He foond also the tresor that she broghte.	He found also the treasure that she brought.
In hir langage mercy she bisoghte,	In her language mercy she besought,
The lyf out of hir body for to twynne,	The life out of her body to take away,
Hire to delivere of wo that she was inne.	Her to deliver from the woe that she was in.
A maner Latyn corrupt was hir speche,	A sort of corrupt Latin was her speech,
But algates therby was she understonde.	But nonetheless by means of this she was understood.
The constable, whan hym lyst no longer seche,	The constable, when he desired no longer to search,
This woful womman broghte he to the londe.	This woeful woman he brought to the land.
She kneleth doun and thanketh Goddes sonde;	She kneels down and gives thanks for what God has sent;
But what she was she wolde no man seye,	But who she was she would tell no man,
For foul ne fair, thogh that she sholde deye.	For anything, though she should die.
She seyde she was so mazed in the see	She said she was so bewildered in the sea
That she forgat hir mynde, by hir trouthe.	That she lost her memory, by her pledged word (she swore).
The constable hath of hire so greet pitee,	The constable has for her such great pity,
And eek his wyf, that they wepen for routhe.	And also his wife, that they weep for pity.
She was so diligent, withouten slouthe,	She was so diligent, without laziness,
To serve and plesen everich in that place	To serve and please every one in that place
That alle hir loven that looken in hir face.	That all who look in her face love her.
This constable and dame Hermengyld, his wyf,	This constable and Lady Hermengild, his wife,
Were payens, and that contree everywhere;	Were pagans, and (so was) that country everywhere;
But Hermengyld loved hire right as hir lyf,	But Hermengild loved her as much as her life,
And Custance hath so longe sojourned there,	And Custance has so long lived there,
In orisons, with many a bitter teere,	In prayers, with many a bitter tear,
Til Jhesu hath converted thurgh his grace	Until Jesus has converted through his grace
Dame Hermengyld, constablesse of that place.	Dame Hermengild, wife of the constable of that place.
In al that lond no Cristen dorste route;	In all that land no Christians dared assemble;
Alle Cristen folk been fled fro that contree	All Christian folk have fled from that country
Thurgh payens, that conquereden al aboute	Because of pagans, that conquered all about
The plages of the north, by land and see.	The coastal regions of the north, by land and sea.
To Walys fledde the Cristyanytee	To Wales fled the Christian people
Of olde Britons dwellynge in this ile;	Of old Britons dwelling in this isle;
Ther was hir refut for the meene while.	There was their refuge at that time.
But yet nere Cristene Britons so exiled	But yet Christian Britons were not so (completely) exiled
That ther nere somme that in hir privetee	That there were not some that in their secrecy
Honoured Crist and hethen folk bigiled,	Honored Christ and deceived the heathen folk,
And ny the castel swiche ther dwelten three.	And near the castle there dwelt three such (Christians).
That oon of hem was blynd and myghte nat see,	The one of them was blind and could not see,
But it were with thilke eyen of his mynde	Unless it were with those eyes of his mind
With whiche men seen, after that they ben blynde.	With which men see, after they have become blind.
Bright was the sonne as in that someres day,	Bright was the sun in that summer's day,
For which the constable and his wyf also	For which the constable and his wife also
And Custance han ytake the righte way	And Custance have taken the direct route
Toward the see a furlong wey or two,	Toward the sea an eighth of a mile or two,
To pleyen and to romen to and fro,	To amuse themselves and to roam to and fro,
And in hir walk this blynde man they mette,	And in their walk this blind man they met,
Croked and oold, with eyen faste yshette.	Bent over and old, with eyes fast shut.
"In name of Crist," cride this blinde Britoun,	"In the name of Christ," cried this blind Briton,
"Dame Hermengyld, yif me my sighte agayn!"	"Dame Hermengild, give me my sight again!"
This lady weex affrayed of the soun,	This lady grew afraid of these words,
Lest that hir housbonde, shortly for to sayn,	Lest that her husband, shortly to say,
Wolde hire for Jhesu Cristes love han slayn,	Would have slain her for Jesus Christ's love,
Til Custance made hire boold, and bad hire wirche	Until Custance made her bold, and told her to work
The wyl of Crist, as doghter of his chirche.	The will of Christ, as daughter of his church.
The constable weex abasshed of that sight,	The constable grew troubled at that sight,
And seyde, "What amounteth al this fare?"	And said, "What does all this business mean?"
Custance answerde, "Sire, it is Cristes myght,	Custance answered, "Sir, it is Christ's might,
That helpeth folk out of the feendes snare."	That helps folk out of the fiend's snare."
And so ferforth she gan oure lay declare	And so completely she did our religion explain
That she the constable, er that it was eve	That she the constable, before it was evening,
Converteth, and on Crist made hym bileve.	Converts, and made him believe in Christ.
This constable was nothyng lord of this place	This constable was in no way lord of this place
Of which I speke, ther he Custance fond,	Of which I speak, where he Custance found,
But kepte it strongly many a wyntres space	But kept it securely many a winter's space of time
Under Alla, kyng of al Northhumbrelond,	Under Alla, king of all Northumberland,
That was ful wys, and worthy of his hond	Who was full wise, and worthy of his hand (a mighty warrior)
Agayn the Scottes, as men may wel heere;	Against the Scots, as men may well hear;
But turne I wole agayn to my mateere.	But I will turn again to my subject.
Sathan, that evere us waiteth to bigile,	Satan, that ever waits (for a chance) to trick us,
Saugh of Custance al hire perfeccioun,	Saw of Custance all her perfection,
And caste anon how he myghte quite hir while,	And considered right away how he might repay her,
And made a yong knyght that dwelte in that toun	And made a young knight that dwelt in that town
Love hire so hoote, of foul affeccioun,	Love her so passionately, by foul desire,
That verraily hym thoughte he sholde spille,	That truly he thought he should die,
But he of hire myghte ones have his wille.	Unless he might once have his will of her.
He woweth hire, but it availleth noght;	He woos her, but it avails not;
She wolde do no synne, by no weye.	She would do no sin, in no way.
And for despit he compassed in his thoght	And for malice he plotted in his mind
To maken hire on shameful deeth to deye.	To make her in a shameful death to die.
He wayteth whan the constable was aweye,	He waits until the constable was away,
And pryvely upon a nyght he crepte	And secretly one night he crept
In Hermengyldes chambre, whil she slepte.	In Hermengild's bedroom, while she slept.
Wery, forwaked in hire orisouns,	Weary, exhausted because of her prayers,
Slepeth Custance, and Hermengyld also.	Sleeps Custance, and Hermengild also.
This knyght, thurgh Sathanas temptaciouns,	This knight, through Satan's temptations,
Al softely is to the bed ygo,	Very quietly has gone to the bed,
And kitte the throte of Hermengyld atwo,	And cut the throat of Hermengild in two,
And leyde the blody knyf by dame Custance,	And laid the bloody knife by Lady Custance,
And wente his wey, ther God yeve hym meschance!	And went his way, may God give him misfortune!
Soone after cometh this constable hoom agayn,	Soon after, this constable comes home again,
And eek Alla, that kyng was of that lond,	And also Alla, who was king of that land,
And saugh his wyf despitously yslayn,	And saw his wife mercilessly slain,
For which ful ofte he weep and wroong his hond,	For which full often he wept and wrung his hands,
And in the bed the blody knyf he fond	And in the bed the bloody knife he found
By Dame Custance. Allas, what myghte she seye?	By Lady Custance. Alas, what could she say?
For verray wo hir wit was al aweye.	For sheer woe her wit was all away.
To kyng Alla was toold al this meschance,	To king Alla was told all this misfortune,
And eek the tyme, and where, and in what wise	And also the time, and where, and in what manner
That in a ship was founden this Custance,	That in a ship was found this Custance,
As heer-biforn that ye han herd devyse.	As before this you have heard tell.
The kynges herte of pitee gan agryse,	The king's heart for pity trembled,
Whan he saugh so benigne a creature	When he saw so good a creature
Falle in disese and in mysaventure.	Fallen in distress and in misfortune.
For as the lomb toward his deeth is broght,	For as the lamb toward its death is brought,
So stant this innocent bifore the kyng.	So stands this innocent before the king.
This false knyght, that hath this tresoun wroght,	This false knight, who has this treason wrought,
Berth hire on hond that she hath doon thys thyng.	Falsely testifies that she has done this thing.
But nathelees, ther was greet moornyng	But nonetheless, there was great mourning
Among the peple, and seyn they kan nat gesse	Among the people, and they say they can not imagine
That she had doon so greet a wikkednesse,	That she had done so great a wickedness,
For they han seyn hire evere so vertuous,	For they have seen her always so virtuous,
And lovynge Hermengyld right as hir lyf.	And loving Hermengild as much as her life.
Of this baar witnesse everich in that hous,	Of this bore witness every one in that house,
Save he that Hermengyld slow with his knyf.	Except for him who slew Hermengild with his knife.
This gentil kyng hath caught a greet motyf	This gentle king was deeply moved
Of this witnesse, and thoghte he wolde enquere	By this witness, and thought he would enquire
Depper in this, a trouthe for to lere.	Deeper in this, to learn the truth.
Allas! Custance, thou hast no champioun,	Alas! Custance, thou hast no champion,
Ne fighte kanstow noght, so weylaway!	And fight can thou not, alas!
But he that starf for our redempcioun,	But He that died for our redemption,
And boond Sathan (and yet lith ther he lay),	And bound Satan (and he yet lies where he lay),
So be thy stronge champion this day!	So be thy strong champion this day!
For, but if Crist open myracle kithe,	For, unless Christ a clear miracle reveals,
Withouten gilt thou shalt be slayn as swithe.	Without guilt thou shalt be slain immediately.
She sette hire doun on knees, and thus she sayde:	She set herself down on knees, and thus she said:
"Immortal God, that savedest Susanne	"Immortal God, that savedest Susannah
Fro false blame, and thou, merciful mayde,	From false blame, and thou, merciful maid,
Marie I meene, doghter to Seint Anne,	Mary I mean, daughter to Saint Anne,
Bifore whos child angeles synge Osanne,	Before whose child angels sing Hosanna,
If I be giltlees of this felonye,	If I be guiltless of this felony,
My socour be, for ellis shal I dye!"	My succor be, for otherwise I shall dye!"
Have ye nat seyn somtyme a pale face,	Have you not seen sometime a pale face,
Among a prees, of hym that hath be lad	Among a crowd, of him that has been led
Toward his deeth, wher as hym gat no grace,	Toward his death, where he got no reprieve,
And swich a colour in his face hath had	And such a color in his face has had
Men myghte knowe his face that was bistad	Men might know his face that was in trouble
Amonges alle the faces in that route?	Amongst all the faces in that route?
So stant Custance, and looketh hire aboute.	So stands Custance, and looks around her.
O queenes, lyvynge in prosperitee,	O queens, living in prosperity,
Duchesses, and ye ladyes everichone,	Duchesses, and you ladies each one,
Haveth som routhe on hire adversitee!	Have some pity on her adversity!
An Emperoures doghter stant allone;	An Emperor's daughter stands alone;
She hath no wight to whom to make hir mone.	She has no person to whom to lament (plead for help).
O blood roial, that stondest in this drede,	O blood royal, that stands in this dreadful state,
Fer been thy freendes at thy grete nede!	Far away are thy friends at thy great need!
This Alla kyng hath swich compassioun,	This king Alla has such compassion,
As gentil herte is fulfild of pitee,	Since a noble heart is filled with pity,
That from his eyen ran the water doun.	That from his eyes ran the water down.
"Now hastily do fecche a book," quod he,	"Now hastily have a book fetched," said he,
"And if this knyght wol sweren how that she	"And if this knight will swear how that she
This womman slow, yet wol we us avyse	Slew this woman, then will we think carefully about
Whom that we wole that shal been oure justise."	Whom we desire to be our judge (i.e., bring her to trial)."
A Britoun book, written with Evaungiles,	A British book, in which were written the gospels,
Was fet, and on this book he swoor anoon	Was fetched, and on this book he swore at once
She gilty was, and in the meene whiles	That she was guilty, and in the same moment
An hand hym smoot upon the nekke-boon,	A hand struck him upon the neck-boon,
That doun he fil atones as a stoon,	That down he fell at once like a stone,
And bothe his eyen broste out of his face	And both his eyes burst out of his face
In sighte of every body in that place.	In sight of every body in that place.
A voys was herd in general audience,	A voice was heard by everyone there,
And seyde, "Thou hast desclaundred, giltelees,	And it said, "Thou hast slandered, guiltless,
The doghter of hooly chirche in heigh presence;	The daughter of holy church in the presence of the High One (God);
Thus hastou doon, and yet holde I my pees!"	Thus hast thou done, and yet I hold my peace!"
Of this mervaille agast was al the prees;	Of this marvel terrified was all the crowd of people;
As mazed folk they stoden everichone,	Like bewildered folk they stood each one,
For drede of wreche, save Custance allone.	For fear of vengeance, except for Custance alone.
Greet was the drede and eek the repentance	Great was the fear and also the repentance
Of hem that hadden wrong suspecioun	Of them that had a wrong suspicion
Upon this sely innocent, Custance;	Of this blessed innocent, Custance;
And for this miracle, in conclusioun,	And because of this miracle, in conclusion,
And by Custances mediacioun,	And by Custance's mediation,
The kyng -- and many another in that place --	The king -- and many another in that place --
Converted was, thanked be Cristes grace!	Converted was, thanked be Christ's grace!
This false knyght was slayn for his untrouthe	This false knight was slain for his untruth
By juggement of Alla hastifly;	By judgment of Alla immediately;
And yet Custance hadde of his deeth greet routhe.	And yet Custance had for his death great pity.
And after this Jhesus, of his mercy,	And after this Jesus, of His mercy,
Made Alla wedden ful solempnely	Made Alla wed full solemnly
This hooly mayden, that is so bright and sheene;	This holy maiden, that is so bright and beautiful;
And thus hath Crist ymaad Custance a queene.	And thus has Christ made Custance a queen.
But who was woful, if I shal nat lye,	But who was woeful, if I shall not lie,
Of this weddyng but Donegild, and namo,	Of this wedding but Donegild, and no others,
The kynges mooder, ful of tirannye?	The king's mother, full of tyranny?
Hir thoughte hir cursed herte brast atwo.	She thought her cursed heart broke in two.
She wolde noght hir sone had do so;	She wished that her son had not done so;
Hir thoughte a despit that he sholde take	She thought it an insult that he should take
So strange a creature unto his make.	So foreign a creature as his mate.
Me list nat of the chaf, ne of the stree,	I do not want of the chaff, nor of the straw,
Maken so long a tale as of the corn.	To make so long a tale as of the grain (the essential part).
What sholde I tellen of the roialtee	Why should I tell of the royalty
At mariage, or which cours goth biforn;	At the marriage, or which course goes before;
Who bloweth in a trumpe or in an horn?	Who blows in a trumpet or in a horn?
The fruyt of every tale is for to seye:	The fruit (the essential part) of every tale is to be told:
They ete, and drynke, and daunce, and synge, and pleye.	They eat, and drink, and dance, and sing, and play.
They goon to bedde, as it was skile and right;	They go to bed, as it was reasonable and right;
For thogh that wyves be ful hooly thynges,	For though wives are full holy things,
They moste take in pacience at nyght	They must take in patience at night
Swiche manere necessaries as been plesynges	Such sorts of necessary acts as are pleasing
To folk that han ywedded hem with rynges,	To folk that have wedded them with rings,
And leye a lite hir hoolynesse aside,	And (they must) lay their holiness aside a little while,
As for the tyme -- it may no bet bitide.	As for the time being -- it can be no better.
On hire he gat a knave child anon,	On her he begot a male child quickly,
And to a bisshop, and his constable eke,	And to a bishop, and his constable also,
He took his wyf to kepe, whan he is gon	He gave his wife to protect, when he is gone
To Scotlond-ward, his foomen for to seke.	Toward Scotland, his foemen to seek.
Now faire Custance, that is so humble and meke,	Now fair Custance, who is so humble and meek,
So longe is goon with childe, til that stille	So long is gone with child, until that quietly
She halt hire chambre, abidyng Cristes wille.	She keeps to her chamber, abiding Christ's will.
The tyme is come a knave child she beer;	The time is come a male child she bore;
Mauricius at the fontstoon they hym calle.	Mauricius at the baptismal font they call him.
This constable dooth forth come a messageer,	This constable orders a messenger to come forth,
And wroot unto his kyng, that cleped was Alle,	And wrote unto his king, who was called Alla,
How that this blisful tidyng is bifalle,	How this blissful event has occurred,
And othere tidynges spedeful for to seye.	And other tidings useful to be said.
He taketh the lettre, and forth he gooth his weye.	He takes the letter, and forth he goes his way.
This messager, to doon his avantage,	This messenger, to do (something for) his profit,
Unto the kynges mooder rideth swithe,	Unto the king's mother rides quickly,
And salueth hire ful faire in his langage:	And salutes her full fair in his language:
"Madame," quod he, "ye may be glad and blithe,	"Madame," said he, "you may be glad and happy,
And thanketh God an hundred thousand sithe!	And thank God a hundred thousand times!
My lady queene hath child, withouten doute,	My lady queen has a child, without doubt,
To joye and blisse to al this regne aboute.	As a joy and bliss to all this reign about.
"Lo, heere the lettres seled of this thyng,	"Lo, here (are) the letters sealed of this business,
That I moot bere with al the haste I may.	That I must bear with all the haste I can.
If ye wol aught unto youre sone the kyng,	If you will (send) anything unto your son the king,
I am youre servant, bothe nyght and day."	I am at your service, both night and day."
Donegild answerde, "As now at this tyme, nay;	Donegild answered, "Right now, at this time, no;
But heere al nyght I wol thou take thy reste.	But here all night I want that thou take thy rest.
To-morwe wol I seye thee what me leste."	Tomorrow will I say to thee what I wish."
This messager drank sadly ale and wyn,	This messenger drank heavily ale and wine,
And stolen were his lettres pryvely	And stolen were his letters secretly
Out of his box, whil he sleep as a swyn;	Out of his box, while he slept like a pig;
And countrefeted was ful subtilly	And counterfeited was full subtly
Another lettre, wroght ful synfully,	Another letter, made full sinfully,
Unto the kyng direct of this mateere	Directed unto the king concerning this matter
Fro his constable, as ye shal after heere.	From his constable, as you shall after hear.
The lettre spak the queene delivered was	The letter said the queen delivered was
Of so horrible a feendly creature	Of so horrible a fiendish creature
That in the castel noon so hardy was	That in the castle no one was so bold
That any while dorste ther endure.	That for any length of time dared to remain near it.
The mooder was an elf, by aventure	The mother was an evil spirit, by chance
Ycomen, by charmes or by sorcerie,	Come, by charms or by sorcery,
And every wight hateth hir compaignye.	And every person hates her company.
Wo was this kyng whan he this lettre had sayn,	Woe was this king when he this letter had seen,
But to no wight he tolde his sorwes soore,	But to no person he told his painful sorrows,
But of his owene hand he wroot agayn,	But by his own hand he wrote in answer,
"Welcome the sonde of Crist for everemoore	"Welcome be the dispensation of Christ for evermore
To me that am now lerned in his loore!	To me that am now learned in his teaching!
Lord, welcome be thy lust and thy plesaunce;	Lord, welcome be thy desire and thy pleasure;
My lust I putte al in thyn ordinaunce.	I put all my will in thy governance.
"Kepeth this child, al be it foul or feir,	"Guard this child, whether it be foul or fair,
And eek my wyf, unto myn hoom-comynge.	And also my wife, until my home-coming.
Crist, whan hym list, may sende me an heir	Christ, when He pleases, may send me an heir
Moore agreable than this to my likynge."	Moore agreeable than this to my desire."
This lettre he seleth, pryvely wepynge,	This letter he seals, secretly weeping,
Which to the messager was take soone,	Which to the messenger was given soon,
And forth he gooth; ther is na moore to doone.	And forth he goes; there is nothing more to do.
O messager, fulfild of dronkenesse,	O messenger, filled with drunkenness,
Strong is thy breeth, thy lymes faltren ay,	Strong is thy breath, thy limbs ever tremble,
And thou biwreyest alle secreenesse.	And thou betray all secrets.
Thy mynde is lorn, thou janglest as a jay,	Thy mind is lost, thou chatter like a jay,
Thy face is turned in a newe array.	Thy face is completely changed.
Ther dronkenesse regneth in any route,	Where drunkenness reigns in any group,
Ther is no conseil hyd, withouten doute.	There is no secret hidden, without doubt.
O Donegild, I ne have noon Englissh digne	O Donegild, I do not have any English suitable (to describe)
Unto thy malice and thy tirannye!	Unto thy malice and thy tyranny!
And therfore to the feend I thee resigne;	And therefore to the fiend I thee consign;
Lat hym enditen of thy traitorie!	Let him write about thy treachery!
Fy, mannysh, fy! -- o nay, by God, I lye --	Fie, like a man, fie! -- o nay, by God, I lie --
Fy, feendlych spirit, for I dar wel telle,	Fie, like a fiendish spirit, for I dare well tell,
Thogh thou heere walke, thy spirit is in helle!	Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell!
This messager comth fro the kyng agayn,	This messenger comes from the king again,
And at the kynges moodres court he lighte,	And at the king's mother's court he dismounted,
And she was of this messager ful fayn,	And she was very happy because of this messenger,
And plesed hym in al that ever she myghte.	And (she) pleased him in all that ever she could.
He drank, and wel his girdel underpighte;	He drank, and well stuffed (drink) under his belt;
He slepeth, and he fnorteth in his gyse	He sleeps, and he snorts in his way
Al nyght, til the sonne gan aryse.	All night, until the sun did arise.
Eft were his lettres stolen everychon,	Again were his letters stolen every one,
And countrefeted lettres in this wyse:	And counterfeited letters in this manner:
"The king comandeth his constable anon,	"The king commands his constable at once,
Up peyne of hangyng, and on heigh juyse,	Upon pain of hanging, and of strict judicial punishment,
That he ne sholde suffren in no wyse	That he should not allow in any manner
Custance in-with his reawme for t' abyde	Custance within his realm to remain
Thre dayes and o quarter of a tyde;	Three days and a quarter of duration of a tide (three hours);
"But in the same ship as he hire fond,	"But in the same ship as he her found,
Hire, and hir yonge sone, and al hir geere,	Her, and her young son, and all her gear,
He sholde putte, and croude hire fro the lond,	He should put, and push her from the land,
And charge hire that she never eft coome theere."	And command her that she never again come here."
O my Custance, wel may thy goost have feere,	O my Custance, well may thy spirit have fear,
And, slepynge, in thy dreem been in penance,	And, sleeping, in thy dream to be in suffering,
Whan Donegild cast al this ordinance.	When Donegild devised all this plan.
This messager on morwe, whan he wook,	This messenger in the morning, when he awoke,
Unto the castel halt the nexte way,	Unto the castle goes the nearest way,
And to the constable he the lettre took;	And to the constable he gave the letter;
And whan that he this pitous lettre say,	And when that he this pitiful letter saw,
Ful ofte he seyde, "Allas and weylaway!"	Full often he said, "Alas and woe!"
"Lord Crist," quod he, "how may this world endure,	"Lord Christ," said he, "how can this world endure,
So ful of synne is many a creature?	So full of sin is so many a creature?
"O myghty God, if that it be thy wille,	"O mighty God, if it be thy will,
Sith thou art rightful juge, how may it be	Since thou art rightful judge, how may it be
That thou wolt suffren innocentz to spille,	That thou wilt allow innocents to die,
And wikked folk regne in prosperitee?	And wicked folk to reign in prosperity?
O goode Custance, allas, so wo is me	O good Custance, alas, so woeful am I
That I moot be thy tormentour, or deye	That I must be thy tormentor, or die
On shames deeth; ther is noon oother weye."	In a shameful death; there is no other way."
Wepen bothe yonge and olde in al that place	Weep both young and old in all that place
Whan that the kyng this cursed lettre sente,	When the king this cursed letter sent,
And Custance, with a deedly pale face,	And Custance, with a deadly pale face,
The ferthe day toward hir ship she wente.	The fourth day toward her ship she went.
But nathelees she taketh in good entente	But nonetheless she takes in good faith
The wyl of Crist, and knelynge on the stronde,	The will of Christ, and kneeling on the strand,
She seyde, "Lord, ay welcome be thy sonde!	She said, "Lord, always welcome be thy dispensation!
"He that me kepte fro the false blame	"He that me kept from the false blame
While I was on the lond amonges yow,	While I was on the land amongst you,
He kan me kepe from harm and eek fro shame	He can keep me from harm and also from shame
In salte see, althogh I se noght how.	In the salt sea, although I see not how.
As strong as evere he was, he is yet now.	As strong as ever He was, He is yet now.
In hym triste I, and in his mooder deere,	In Him trust I, and in his mother dear,
That is to me my seyl and eek my steere."	Who is to me my sail and also my rudder."
Hir litel child lay wepyng in hir arm,	Her little child lay weeping in her arm,
And knelynge, pitously to hym she seyde,	And kneeling, pitifully to him she said,
"Pees, litel sone, I wol do thee noon harm."	"Peace, little son, I will do thee no harm."
With that hir coverchief of hir heed she breyde,	With that her kerchief off her head she pulled,
And over his litel eyen she it leyde,	And over his little eyes she it laid,
And in hir arm she lulleth it ful faste,	And in her arm she lulls it fast asleep,
And into hevene hire eyen up she caste.	And into heaven her eyes up she caste.
"Mooder," quod she, "and mayde bright, Marie,	"Mother," said she, "and maiden bright, Mary,
Sooth is that thurgh wommanes eggement	True it is that through woman's instigation
Mankynde was lorn, and damned ay to dye,	Mankind was lost, and damned forever to die,
For which thy child was on a croys yrent.	For which thy child was on a cross stretched.
Thy blisful eyen sawe al his torment;	Thy blissful eyes saw all his torment;
Thanne is ther no comparison bitwene	Then is there no comparison between
Thy wo and any wo man may sustene.	Thy woe and any woe man may sustain.
"Thow sawe thy child yslayn bifore thyne yen,	"Thou saw thy child slain before thy eyes,
And yet now lyveth my litel child, parfay!	And yet now lives my little child, in faith!
Now, lady bright, to whom alle woful cryen,	Now, lady bright, to whom all woeful (people) cry,
Thow glorie of wommanhede, thow faire may,	Thou glory of womanhood, thou fair maiden,
Thow haven of refut, brighte sterre of day,	Thou haven of refuge, bright star of day,
Rewe on my child, that of thy gentillesse	Have pity on my child, (thou who) of thy nobility
Rewest on every reweful in distresse.	Takes pity on every wretched person in distress.
"O litel child, allas! What is thy gilt,	"O little child, alas! What is thy guilt,
That nevere wroghtest synne as yet, pardee?	That never did sin as yet, in faith?
Why wil thyn harde fader han thee spilt?	Why will thy hard father have thee killed?
O mercy, deere constable," quod she,	O mercy, dear constable," said she,
"As lat my litel child dwelle heer with thee;	"Let my little child remain here with thee;
And if thou darst nat saven hym, for blame,	And if thou dare not save him, for fear of punishment,
So kys hym ones in his fadres name!"	Kiss him once in his father's name!"
Therwith she looked bakward to the londe,	Therewith she looked backward to the land,
And seyde, "Farewel, housbonde routhelees!"	And said, "Farewell, ruthless husband!"
And up she rist, and walketh doun the stronde	And up she rises, and walks down the strand
Toward the ship -- hir folweth al the prees --	Toward the ship -- all the crowd follows her --
And evere she preyeth hire child to holde his pees;	And ever she prays her child to hold his peace;
And taketh hir leve, and with an hooly entente	And takes her leave, and with a holy attitude
She blisseth hire, and into ship she wente.	She blesses herself, and into the ship she went.
Vitailled was the ship, it is no drede,	Supplied with food was the ship, it is no doubt,
Habundantly for hire ful longe space,	Abundantly for her very long time (of sailing),
And othere necessaries that sholde nede	And other necessities that should be needed
She hadde ynogh -- heryed be Goddes grace!	She had enough -- praised be God's grace!
For wynd and weder almyghty God purchace,	For wind and weather almighty God provide,
And brynge hire hoom! I kan no bettre seye,	And bring her home! I can no better say,
But in the see she dryveth forth hir weye.	But in the sea she drives forth on her way.
Alla the kyng comth hoom soone after this	Alla the king comes home soon after this
Unto his castel, of which I tolde,	Unto his castle, of the which I told,
And asketh where his wyf and his child is.	And asks where his wife and his child is.
The constable gan aboute his herte colde,	The constable began about his heart to grow cold,
And pleynly al the manere he hym tolde	And plainly the whole affair he him told
As ye han herd -- I kan telle it no bettre --	As you have heard -- I can tell it no better --
And sheweth the kyng his seel and eek his lettre,	And shows the king his seal and also his letter,
And seyde, "Lord, as ye comanded me	And said, "Lord, as you commanded me
Up peyne of deeth, so have I doon, certein."	Upon pain of death, so have I done, certainly."
This messager tormented was til he	This messenger tortured was until he
Moste biknowe and tellen, plat and pleyn,	Had to reveal and tell, bluntly and plainly,
Fro nyght to nyght, in what place he had leyn;	From night to night, in what place he had lain;
And thus, by wit and sotil enquerynge,	And thus, by wit and subtle questioning,
Ymagined was by whom this harm gan sprynge.	Deduced was by whom this harm did spring.
The hand was knowe that the lettre wroot,	The hand was known that the letter wrote,
And al the venym of this cursed dede,	And all the venom of this cursed deed,
But in what wise, certeinly, I noot.	But in what manner (this was done), certainly, I know not.
Th' effect is this: that Alla, out of drede,	The effect is this: that Alla, without doubt,
His mooder slow -- that may men pleynly rede --	His mother slew -- that may men plainly read --
For that she traitour was to hire ligeance.	Because she traitor was to her allegiance.
Thus endeth olde Donegild, with meschance!	Thus ends old Donegild, with bad luck to her!
The sorwe that this Alla nyght and day	The sorrow that this Alla night and day
Maketh for his wyf, and for his child also,	Makes for his wife, and for his child also,
Ther is no tonge that it telle may.	There is no tongue that it can tell.
But now wol I unto Custance go,	But now will I go unto Custance,
That fleteth in the see, in peyne and wo,	Who floats in the sea, in pain and woe,
Fyve yeer and moore, as liked Cristes sonde,	Five years and more, as it pleased Christ's dispensation,
Er that hir ship approched unto londe.	Before her ship approached unto land.
Under an hethen castel, atte laste,	Alongside a heathen castle, at the last,
Of which the name in my text noght I fynde,	Of which the name in my text I do not find,
Custance, and eek hir child, the see up caste.	Custance, and also her child, the sea up cast.
Almyghty God, that saveth al mankynde,	Almighty God, that saves all mankind,
Have on Custance and on hir child som mynde,	Have for Custance and for her child some thought,
That fallen is in hethen hand eft soone,	Who fallen is in heathen hand once more,
In point to spille, as I shal telle yow soone.	On the point of dying, as I shall tell you soon.
Doun fro the castel comth ther many a wight	Down from the castle comes there many a person
To gauren on this ship and on Custance.	To stare on this ship and on Custance.
But shortly, from the castel, on a nyght,	But shortly, from the castle, on a night,
The lordes styward -- God yeve hym meschance! --	The lord's steward -- God give him bad luck! --
A theef, that hadde reneyed oure creance,	A thief, that had renounced our religion,
Cam into ship allone, and seyde he sholde	Came into ship alone, and said he should
Hir lemman be, wher-so she wolde or nolde.	Her lover be, whether she would or would not.
Wo was this wrecched womman tho bigon;	Woebegone then was this wretched woman;
Hir child cride, and she cride pitously.	Her child cried, and she cried pitifully.
But blisful Marie heelp hire right anon;	But blissful Mary helped her right then;
For with hir struglyng wel and myghtily	For with her struggling well and mightily
The theef fil over bord al sodeynly,	The thief fell over board all suddenly,
And in the see he dreynte for vengeance;	And in the sea he drowned as a punishment;
And thus hath Crist unwemmed kept Custance.	And thus has Christ kept Custance undefiled.
O foule lust of luxurie, lo, thyn ende!	O foul lust of lechery, lo, thy end!
Nat oonly that thou feyntest mannes mynde,	Not only that thou make man's mind grow faint,
But verraily thou wolt his body shende.	But truly thou wilt his body destroy.
Th' ende of thy werk, or of thy lustes blynde,	The end of thy work, or of thy blind desires,
Is compleynyng. Hou many oon may men fynde	Is lamentation. How many a one may men find
That noght for werk somtyme, but for th' entente	That not for the deed sometimes, but for the intention
To doon this synne, been outher slayn or shente!	To do this sin, are either slain or destroyed!
How may this wayke womman han this strengthe	How may this weak woman have this strength
Hire to defende agayn this renegat?	Herself to defend against this renegade?
O Golias, unmesurable of lengthe,	O Goliath, immeasurable of height,
Hou myghte David make thee so maat,	How could David make thee so defeated,
So yong and of armure so desolaat?	So young and so lacking in arms and armor?
Hou dorste he looke upon thy dredful face?	How dared he look upon thy dreadful face?
Wel may men seen, it nas but Goddes grace.	Well may men see, it was nothing but God's grace.
Who yaf Judith corage or hardynesse	Who gave Judith courage or hardiness
To sleen hym Olofernus in his tente,	To slay that Holofernes in his tent,
And to deliveren out of wrecchednesse	And to deliver out of wretchedness
The peple of God? I seye, for this entente,	The people of God? I say, for this purpose,
That right as God spirit of vigour sente	That just as God the spirit of vigor sent
To hem and saved hem out of meschance,	To them and saved them out of misfortune,
So sente he myght and vigour to Custance.	So sent he might and vigor to Custance.
Forth gooth hir ship thurghout the narwe mouth	Forth goes her ship throughout the narrow mouth
Of Jubaltare and Septe, dryvynge ay	Of Gibraltar and Morocco, driving ever
Somtyme west, and somtyme north and south,	Sometimes west, and sometimes north and south,
And somtyme est, ful many a wery day,	And sometimes east, full many a weary day,
Til Cristes mooder -- blessed be she ay! --	Until Christ's mother -- blessed be she always! --
Hath shapen, thurgh hir endelees goodnesse,	Has devised a plan, through her endless goodness,
To make an ende of al hir hevynesse.	To make an end of all her sadness.
Now lat us stynte of Custance but a throwe,	Now let us stint of Custance but a short while,
And speke we of the Romayn Emperour,	And speak we of the Roman Emperor,
That out of Surrye hath by lettres knowe	That out of Syria has by letters known
The slaughtre of cristen folk, and dishonour	The slaughter of Christian folk, and dishonor
Doon to his doghter by a fals traytour,	Done to his daughter by a false traitor,
I mene the cursed wikked Sowdanesse	I mean the cursed wicked Sultaness
That at the feeste leet sleen bothe moore and lesse.	That at the feast caused to be slain both high ranking and low.
For which this Emperour hath sent anon	For which this Emperor has sent at once
His senatour, with roial ordinance,	His senator, with royal armaments,
And othere lordes, God woot, many oon,	And other lords, God knows, many a one,
On Surryens to taken heigh vengeance.	On Syrians to take great vengeance.
They brennen, sleen, and brynge hem to meschance	They burn, slay, and bring them to misery
Ful many a day; but shortly -- this is th' ende --	Full many a day; but shortly -- this is the end --
Homward to Rome they shapen hem to wende.	Homeward to Rome they prepared themselves to wend.
This senatour repaireth with victorie	This senator goes with victory
To Rome-ward, saillynge ful roially,	Toward Rome, sailing full royally,
And mette the ship dryvynge, as seith the storie,	And met the ship sailing, as says the story,
In which Custance sit ful pitously.	In which Custance sits full piteously.
Nothyng ne knew he what she was, ne why	In no way knew he who she was, nor why
She was in swich array, ne she nyl seye	She was in such a state, she will not tell
Of hire estaat, althogh she sholde deye.	Of her rank, although she should die.
He bryngeth hire to Rome, and to his wyf	He brings her to Rome, and to his wife
He yaf hire, and hir yonge sone also;	He gave her, and her young son also;
And with the senatour she ladde hir lyf.	And with the senator she led her life.
Thus kan Oure Lady bryngen out of wo	Thus can Our Lady bring out of woe
Woful Custance, and many another mo.	Woeful Custance, and many another more.
And longe tyme dwelled she in that place,	And long time dwelled she in that place,
In hooly werkes evere, as was hir grace.	In holy works ever, as was her special gift of God.
The senatoures wyf hir aunte was,	The senator's wife was her aunt,
But for al that she knew hire never the moore.	But for all that she knew her never the more.
I wol no lenger tarien in this cas,	I will no longer tarry in this case,
But to kyng Alla, which I spak of yoore,	But to king Alla, whom I spoke of formerly,
That for his wyf wepeth and siketh soore,	Who for his wife weeps and sighs sore,
I wol retourne, and lete I wol Custance	I will return, and I will leave Custance
Under the senatoures governance.	Under the senator's governance.
Kyng Alla, which that hadde his mooder slayn,	King Alla, who had his mother slain,
Upon a day fil in swich repentance	Upon a day fell in such repentance
That, if I shortly tellen shal and playn,	That, if I shortly tell shall and plainly,
To Rome he comth to receyven his penance;	To Rome he comes to receive his penance;
And putte hym in the Popes ordinance	And put him in the Pope's governance
In heigh and logh, and Jhesu Crist bisoghte	In all things, and Jesus Christ besought
Foryeve his wikked werkes that he wroghte.	To forgive his wicked deeds that he did.
The fame anon thurgh Rome toun is born,	The news at once through Rome town is carried,
How Alla kyng shal comen in pilgrymage,	How Alla king shall come in pilgrimage,
By herbergeours that wenten hym biforn;	By arrangers of lodging that went before him;
For which the senatour, as was usage,	For which the senator, as was the custom,
Rood hym agayns, and many of his lynage,	Rode to meet him, and many of his lineage,
As wel to shewen his heighe magnificence	As well to show his high magnificence
As to doon any kyng a reverence.	As to do any king a reverence.
Greet cheere dooth this noble senatour	Great friendliness shows this noble senator
To kyng Alla, and he to hym also;	To king Alla, and he to him also;
Everich of hem dooth oother greet honour.	Every one of them does the other great honor.
And so bifel that in a day or two	And so it happened that in a day or two
This senatour is to kyng Alla go	This senator is to king Alla gone
To feste, and shortly, if I shal nat lye,	To feast, and shortly, if I shall not lie,
Custances sone wente in his compaignye.	Custance's son went in his company.
Som men wolde seyn at requeste of Custance	Some men would say at request of Custance
This senatour hath lad this child to feeste;	This senator has led this child to the feast;
I may nat tellen every circumstance --	I can not tell every detail --
Be as be may, ther was he at the leeste.	Be as be may, there he was at the least.
But sooth is this, that at his moodres heeste	But the truth is this, that at his mother's command
Biforn Alla, durynge the metes space,	Before Alla, during the meal time,
The child stood, lookynge in the kynges face.	The child stood, looking in the king's face.
This Alla kyng hath of this child greet wonder,	This king Alla has of this child great wonder,
And to the senatour he seyde anon,	And to the senator he said at once,
"Whos is that faire child that stondeth yonder?"	"Whose is that fair child that stands yonder?"
"I noot," quod he, "by God, and by Seint John!	"I do not know," said he, "by God, and by Saint John!
A mooder he hath, but fader hath he noon	A mother he has, but father has he none
That I of woot" -- and shortly, in a stounde,	That I know of" -- and shortly, in a little while,
He tolde Alla how that this child was founde.	He told Alla how this child was found.
"But God woot," quod this senatour also,	"But God knows," said this senator also,
"So vertuous a lyvere in my lyf	"So virtuous a liver in my life
Ne saugh I nevere as she, ne herde of mo,	Saw I never as she, nor heard of more,
Of worldly wommen, mayde, ne of wyf.	Of worldly women, maiden, nor of wife.
I dar wel seyn hir hadde levere a knyf	I dare well say she had rather have a knife
Thurghout hir brest, than ben a womman wikke;	Through her breast, than be a woman wicked;
There is no man koude brynge hire to that prikke."	There is no man could bring her to that point."
Now was this child as lyk unto Custance	Now was this child as like unto Custance
As possible is a creature to be.	As it is possible for a creature to be.
This Alla hath the face in remembrance	This Alla has the face in remembrance
Of dame Custance, and ther on mused he	Of Lady Custance, and thereon mused he
If that the childes mooder were aught she	If the child's mother were in any way she
That is his wyf, and pryvely he sighte,	Who is his wife, and secretly he sighed,
And spedde hym fro the table that he myghte.	And sped himself from the table as fast as he could.
"Parfay," thoghte he, "fantome is in myn heed!	"In faith," thought he, "hallucination is in my head!
I oghte deme, of skilful juggement,	I ought to believe, by reasonable judgment,
That in the salte see my wyf is deed."	That in the salt sea my wife is dead."
And afterward he made his argument:	And afterward he made his contrary argument:
"What woot I if that Crist have hyder ysent	"What know I if Christ has hither sent
My wyf by see, as wel as he hire sente	My wife by sea, as well as he her sent
To my contree fro thennes that she wente?"	To my country from thence that she went?"
And after noon, hoom with the senatour	And after noon, home with the senator
Goth Alla, for to seen this wonder chaunce.	Goes Alla, to see this wonderful happening.
This senatour dooth Alla greet honour,	This senator does Alla great honor,
And hastifly he sente after Custaunce.	And hastily he sent after Custance.
But trusteth weel, hire liste nat to daunce	But trust well, she did not want to dance
Whan that she wiste wherfore was that sonde;	When she knew the reason for that summons;
Unnethe upon hir feet she myghte stonde.	Hardly upon her feet she could stand.
Whan Alla saugh his wyf, faire he hire grette,	When Alla saw his wife, gently he greeted her,
And weep that it was routhe for to see;	And wept that it was a pity to see;
For at the firste look he on hire sette	For at the first look he on her set
He knew wel verraily that it was she.	He knew well indeed that it was she.
And she, for sorwe, as doumb stant as a tree,	And she, for sorrow, stands as dumb as a tree,
So was hir herte shet in hir distresse,	So was her heart shut (pressed by emotion) in her distress,
Whan she remembred his unkyndenesse.	When she remembered his unnatural cruelty.
Twyes she swowned in his owene sighte;	Twice she swooned in his own sight;
He weep, and hym excuseth pitously.	He wept, and himself excuses piteously.
"Now God," quod he, "and his halwes brighte	"Now God," said he, "and his saints bright
So wisly on my soule as have mercy,	As surely as they may have mercy on my soul,
That of youre harm as giltelees am I	(I swear) that of your harm I am as guiltless
As is Maurice my sone, so lyk youre face;	As is Maurice my son, whose face is so like yours;
Elles the feend me fecche out of this place!"	Otherwise (may) the fiend me fetch out of this place!"
Long was the sobbyng and the bitter peyne,	Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain,
Er that hir woful hertes myghte cesse;	Before their woeful hearts might cease (giving pain);
Greet was the pitee for to heere hem pleyne,	Great was the pity to hear them lament,
Thurgh whiche pleintes gan hir wo encresse.	Through which lamentations began their woe to increase.
I pray yow alle my labour to relesse;	I pray you to release me from all my labor;
I may nat telle hir wo until to-morwe,	I can not tell their woe until to-morrow,
I am so wery for to speke of sorwe.	I am so weary from speaking of sorrow.
But finally, whan that the sothe is wist	But finally, when the truth is known
That Alla giltelees was of hir wo,	That Alla was guiltless of her woe,
I trowe an hundred tymes been they kist,	I believe a hundred times they have kissed,
And swich a blisse is ther bitwix hem two	And such a bliss is there between them two
That, save the joye that lasteth everemo,	That, except for the joy that lasts evermore,
Ther is noon lyk that any creature	There is none like it that any creature
Hath seyn or shal, whil that the world may dure.	Has seen or shall (see), while the world may endure.
Tho preyde she hir housbonde mekely,	Then prayed she her husband meekly,
In relief of hir longe, pitous pyne,	In relief of her long, pitiful pain,
That he wolde preye hir fader specially	That he would pray her father specially
That of his magestee he wolde enclyne	That of his majesty he would incline
To vouche sauf som day with hym to dyne.	To grant some day with him to dine.
She preyde hym eek he sholde by no weye	She prayed him also he should by no means
Unto hir fader no word of hire seye.	Unto her father say any word of her.
Som men wolde seyn how that the child Maurice	Some men would say that the child Maurice
Dooth this message unto this Emperour;	Takes this message unto this Emperor;
But, as I gesse, Alla was nat so nyce	But, as I guess, Alla was not so foolish
To hym that was of so sovereyn honour	To him that was of such high honor
As he that is of Cristen folk the flour,	As he that is of Christian folk the flower,
Sente any child, but it is bet to deeme	To have sent any child, but it is better to believe
He wente hymself, and so it may wel seeme.	He went himself, and that would be most fitting.
This Emperour hath graunted gentilly	This Emperor has agreed nobly
To come to dyner, as he hym bisoughte;	To come to dinner, as he him requested;
And wel rede I he looked bisily	And well read I (in my source) he looked intently
Upon this child, and on his doghter thoghte.	Upon this child, and thought about his daughter.
Alla goth to his in, and as hym oghte,	Alla goes to his inn, and as he should,
Arrayed for this feste in every wise	Prepared for this feast in every way
As ferforth as his konnyng may suffise.	So far as his ability may suffice.
The morwe cam, and Alla gan hym dresse,	The morning came, and Alla began to prepare himself,
And eek his wyf, this Emperour to meete;	And also his wife, to meet this Emperor;
And forth they ryde in joye and in gladnesse.	And forth they ride in joy and in gladness.
And whan she saugh hir fader in the strete,	And when she saw her father in the street,
She lighte doun, and falleth hym to feete.	She dismounted, and falls to his feet.
"Fader," quod she, "youre yonge child Custance	"Father," said she, "your young child Custance
Is now ful clene out of youre remembrance.	Is now completely out of your remembrance.
"I am youre doghter Custance," quod she,	"I am your daughter Custance," said she,
"That whilom ye han sent unto Surrye.	"Whom long ago you have sent unto Syria.
It am I, fader, that in the salte see	It am I, father, that in the salt sea
Was put allone and dampned for to dye.	Was put alone and damned to die.
Now, goode fader, mercy I yow crye!	Now, good father, mercy I beg of you!
Sende me namoore unto noon hethenesse,	Send me no more unto any heathen country,
But thonketh my lord heere of his kyndenesse."	But thank my lord here of his kindnesses."
Who kan the pitous joye tellen al	Who can tell all the pitiful joy
Bitwixe hem thre, syn they been thus ymette?	Between them three, since they are thus met?
But of my tale make an ende I shal;	But of my tale I shall make an end;
The day goth faste, I wol no lenger lette.	The day goes fast, I will no longer delay.
This glade folk to dyner they hem sette;	This glad folk to dinner they themselves set;
In joye and blisse at mete I lete hem dwelle	In joy and bliss at their meal I let them remain
A thousand foold wel moore than I kan telle.	A thousand fold well more (blissful) than I can tell.
This child Maurice was sithen Emperour	This child Maurice was later Emperor
Maad by the Pope, and lyved cristenly;	Made by the Pope, and lived in a Christian manner;
To Cristes chirche he dide greet honour.	To Christ's church he did great honor.
But I lete al his storie passen by;	But I let all his story pass by;
Of Custance is my tale specially.	Of Custance is my tale in particular.
In the olde Romayn geestes may men fynde	In the old Roman histories may men find
Maurices lyf; I bere it noght in mynde.	Maurice's life; I bear it not in mind.
This kyng Alla, whan he his tyme say,	This king Alla, when he his time saw,
With his Custance, his hooly wyf so sweete,	With his Custance, his holy wife so sweet,
To Engelond been they come the righte way,	To England are they come by the direct route,
Wher as they lyve in joye and in quiete.	Where they live in joy and in quiet.
But litel while it lasteth, I yow heete,	But little while it lasts, I you promise,
Joye of this world, for tyme wol nat abyde;	Joy of this world, because time will not stand still;
Fro day to nyght it changeth as the tyde.	From day to night it changes like the tide.
Who lyved euere in swich delit o day	Who lived ever in such delight one day
That hym ne moeved outher conscience,	That he was not moved by either conscience,
Or ire, or talent, or som kynnes affray,	Or anger, or desire, or some kind of fear,
Envye, or pride, or passion, or offence?	Envy, or pride, or passion, or offence?
I ne seye but for this ende this sentence,	I make this statement only for this conclusion,
That litel while in joye or in plesance	That little while in joy or in pleasure
Lasteth the blisse of Alla with Custance.	Lasts the bliss of Alla with Custance.
For Deeth, that taketh of heigh and logh his rente,	For Death, that takes of high ranking and low his payment,
Whan passed was a yeer, evene as I gesse,	When passed was a year, as I suppose,
Out of this world this kyng Alla he hente,	Out of this world this king Alla he seized,
For whom Custance hath ful greet hevynesse.	For whom Custance has full great sadness.
Now lat us prayen God his soule blesse!	Now let us pray God his soul be blessed!
And dame Custance, finally to seye,	And Lady Custance, finally to say,
Toward the toun of Rome goth hir weye.	Toward the town of Rome goes her way.
To Rome is come this hooly creature,	To Rome has come this holy creature,
And fyndeth hire freendes hoole and sounde;	And finds her friends whole and sound;
Now is she scaped al hire aventure.	Now has she escaped all her adventure.
And whan that she hir fader hath yfounde,	And when she her father has found,
Doun on hir knees falleth she to grounde;	Down on her knees falls she to ground;
Wepynge for tendrenesse in herte blithe,	Weeping for tenderness blithe in heart,
She heryeth God an hundred thousand sithe.	She praises God a hundred thousand times.
In vertu and in hooly almus-dede	In virtue and in holy charitable works
They lyven alle, and nevere asonder wende;	They all live, and never parted;
Til deeth departeth hem, this lyf they lede.	Until death departs them, this life they lead.
And fareth now weel! my tale is at an ende.	And fare now well! my tale is at an end.
Now Jhesu Crist, that of his myght may sende	Now Jesus Christ, that of his might may send
Joye after wo, governe us in his grace,	Joy after woe, govern us in his grace,
And kepe us alle that been in this place! Amen	And keep us all that are in this place! Amen
Heere endeth the tale of the Man of Lawe	Here ends the tale of the Man of Law.
[Owre Hoost upon his stiropes stood anon,	[Our Host upon his stirrups stood up at once,
And seyde, "Goode men, herkeneth everych on!	And said, "Good men, listen every one!
This was a thrifty tale for the nones!	This was a excellent tale for this occasion!
Sir Parisshe Prest," quod he, "for Goddes bones,	Sir Parish Priest," said he, "for God's bones,
Telle us a tale, as was thi forward yore.	Tell us a tale, as was thy previous agreement.
I se wel that ye lerned men in lore	I see well that you men learned in lore
Can moche good, by Goddes dignitee!"	Know much that is good, by God's dignity!"
The Parson him answerde, "Benedicite!	The Parson him answered, "Bless me!
What eyleth the man, so synfully to swere?"	What ails the man, so sinfully to swear?"
Oure Host answerde, "O Jankin, be ye there?	Our Host answered, "O Jankin, are you there?
I smelle a Lollere in the wynd," quod he.	I smell a Lollard in the wind," said he.
"Now! goode men," quod oure Hoste, "herkeneth me;	"Now! good men," said our Host, "listen to me;
Abydeth, for Goddes digne passioun,	Wait, for God's worthy passion,
For we schal han a predicacioun;	For we shall have a sermon;
This Lollere heer wil prechen us somwhat."	This Lollard here will preach us something."
"Nay, by my fader soule, that schal he nat!"	"Nay, by my father's soul, that shall he not!"
Seyde the Shipman, "Heer schal he nat preche;	Said the Shipman, "Here shall he not preach;
He schal no gospel glosen here ne teche.	He shall no gospel interpret here nor teach.
We leven alle in the grete God," quod he;	We all believe in the great God," said he;
"He wolde sowen som difficulte,	"He would sow some difficulty,
Or springen cokkel in our clene corn.	Or sprinkle weeds in our clean grain.
And therfore, Hoost, I warne thee biforn,	And therefore, Host, I warn thee beforehand,
My joly body schal a tale telle,	My handsome body shall tell a tale,
And I schal clynken you so mery a belle,	And I shall clink you so merry a bell,
That I schal waken al this compaignie.	That I shall awaken all this company.
But it schal not ben of philosophie,	But it shall not be of philosophy,
Ne phislyas, ne termes queinte of lawe.	Nor legal cases, nor elaborate terms of law.
Ther is but litel Latyn in my mawe!"	There is but little Latin in my maw!"
Whan ended was the lyf of Seinte Cecile,	When the life of Saint Cecile was ended,
Er we hadde riden fully fyve mile,	Before we had ridden a good five miles,
At Boghtoun under Blee us gan atake	At Boghtoun under Blee overtook us
A man that clothed was in clothes blake,	A man who was clothed in black clothes,
And undernethe he hadde a whyt surplys.	And underneath that he had a white surplice.
His hakeney, that was al pomely grys,	His riding horse, that was all dapple gray,
So swatte that it wonder was to see;	So sweated that it was a wonder to see;
It semed as he had priked miles three.	It seemed as if he had spurred hard for three miles.
The hors eek that his yeman rood upon	The horse also that his yeoman rode upon
So swatte that unnethe myghte it gon.	So sweated that it could hardly move.
Aboute the peytrel stood the foom ful hye;	About the collar stood the foam very high;
He was of foom al flekked as a pye.	He was by foam all flecked like a magpie.
A male tweyfoold on his croper lay;	A double bag on his crupper lay;
It semed that he caried lite array.	It seemed that he carried little gear.
Al light for somer rood this worthy man,	All lightly clad for summer rode this worthy man,
And in myn herte wondren I bigan	And in my heart I began to wonder
What that he was til that I understood	What he was until I understood
How that his cloke was sowed to his hood,	How his cloak was sewn to his hood,
For which, whan I hadde longe avysed me,	For which, when I had long thought about it,
I demed hym som chanoun for to be.	I judged him to be some sort of canon.
His hat heeng at his bak doun by a laas,	His hat hung at his back down by a strap,
For he hadde riden moore than trot or paas;	For he had ridden at more than a trot or a walk;
He hadde ay priked lik as he were wood.	He had always spurred as if he were crazy.
A clote-leef he hadde under his hood	A burdock-leaf he had under his hood
For swoot and for to keep his heed from heete.	For sweat and to keep his head from heat.
But it was joye for to seen hym swete!	But what a joy it was to see him sweat!
His forheed dropped as a stillatorie	His forehead dripped like a still
Were ful of plantayne and of paritorie.	Full of the herbs plantain and pellitory.
And whan that he was come, he gan to crye,	And when he was come to us, he began to cry out,
"God save," quod he, "this joly compaignye!	"God save," said he, "this jolly company!
Faste have I priked," quod he, "for youre sake,	Fast have I spurred," said he, "for your sake,
By cause that I wolde yow atake,	Because I wanted to overtake you,
To riden in this myrie compaignye."	To ride in this merry company."
His yeman eek was ful of curteisye,	His yeoman also was full of courtesy,
And seyde, "Sires, now in the morwe-tyde	And said, "Sirs, just now in the morning time
I saugh yow ryde out of youre hostelrie,	I saw you ride out of your hostelry,
And warned heer my lord and my soverayn,	And told my lord here and my sovereign,
Which that to ryden with yow is ful fayn	Who is very eager to ride with you
For his desport; he loveth daliaunce."	For his pleasure; he loves sociability."
"Freend, for thy warnyng God yeve thee good chaunce,"	"Friend, for thy telling him God give thee good luck,"
Thanne seyde oure Hoost, "for certein it wolde seme	Then said our Host, "for certainly it would seem
Thy lord were wys, and so I may wel deme.	Thy lord is wise, and as I can well judge.
He is ful jocunde also, dar I leye!	He is very cheerful also, I dare wager!
Can he oght telle a myrie tale or tweye,	Can he in any way tell a merry tale or two,
With which he glade may this compaignye?"	With which he may gladden this company?"
"Who, sire? My lord? Ye, ye, withouten lye,	"Who, sir? My lord? Yes, yes, without lie,
He kan of murthe and eek of jolitee	He knows about mirth and also about jollity
Nat but ynough; also, sire, trusteth me,	More than enough; also, sir, trust me,
And ye hym knewe as wel as do I,	If you knew him as well as do I,
Ye wolde wondre how wel and craftily	You would wonder how well and craftily
He koude werke, and that in sondry wise.	He knows how to work, and that in a variety of ways.
He hath take on hym many a greet emprise,	He has taken on him many a great enterprise,
Which were ful hard for any that is heere	Which would be very hard for any one who is here
To brynge aboute, but they of hym it leere.	To bring about, unless they learn it from him.
As hoomly as he rit amonges yow,	Despite how modestly he rides amongst you,
If ye hym knewe, it wolde be for youre prow.	If you knew him, it would be to your advantage.
Ye wolde nat forgoon his aqueyntaunce	You would not forgo his acquaintance
For muchel good, I dar leye in balaunce	For great riches, I dare wager on that
Al that I have in my possessioun.	All that I have in my possession.
He is a man of heigh discrecioun;	He is a man of great discretion;
I warne yow wel, he is a passyng man."	I tell you indeed, he is a remarkable man."
"Wel," quod oure Hoost, "I pray thee, tel me than,	"Well," said our Host, "I pray thee, tell me then,
Is he a clerk, or noon? Telle what he is."	Is he a clerk, or not? Tell what he is."
"Nay, he is gretter than a clerk, ywis,"	"Nay, he is greater than a clerk, indeed,"
Seyde this Yeman, "and in wordes fewe,	Said this Yeoman, "and in few words,
Hoost, of his craft somwhat I wol yow shewe.	Host, I will show you something of his craft.
"I seye, my lord kan swich subtilitee --	"I say, my lord knows such esoteric science --
But al his craft ye may nat wite at me,	But all his craft you can not know from me,
And somwhat helpe I yet to his wirkyng --	And yet somewhat I help in his work --
That al this ground on which we been ridyng,	That all this ground on which we are riding,
Til that we come to Caunterbury toun,	Until we come to Canterbury town,
He koude al clene turnen up-so-doun,	He could turn all completely upside down,
And pave it al of silver and of gold."	And pave it all with silver and with gold."
And whan this Yeman hadde this tale ytold	And when this Yeoman had this tale told
Unto oure Hoost, he seyde, "Benedicitee!	Unto our Host, he said, "Bless you!
This thyng is wonder merveillous to me,	This thing is wonderfully marvelous to me,
Syn that thy lord is of so heigh prudence,	Since thy lord is of such great prudence,
By cause of which men sholde hym reverence,	Because of which men should reverence him,
That of his worshipe rekketh he so lite.	That he cares so little for his own self-respect.
His overslope nys nat worth a myte,	His outer garment is not worth a fraction of a penny,
As in effect, to hym, so moot I go,	Because in fact, to him, as I may go (I swear),
It is al baudy and totore also.	It is all dirty and tattered also.
Why is thy lord so sluttissh, I the preye,	Why is thy lord so slovenly, I pray thee,
And is of power bettre clooth to beye,	And has the power to buy better cloth,
If that his dede accorde with thy speche?	If his deeds accord with thy speech?
Telle me that, and that I thee biseche."	Tell me that, and of that I beseech thee."
"Why?" quod this Yeman, "wherto axe ye me?	"Why?" said this Yeoman, "why do you ask me?
God help me so, for he shal nevere thee!	So help me God, for he shall never prosper!
(But I wol nat avowe that I seye,	(But I will not publicly acknowledge what I say,
And therfore keepe it secree, I yow preye.)	And therefore keep it secret, I pray you.)
He is to wys, in feith, as I bileeve.	He is too wise, in faith, as I believe.
That that is overdoon, it wol nat preeve	That which is done too much, it will not turn out
Aright, as clerkes seyn; it is a vice.	Right, as clerks say; it is a vice.
Wherfore in that I holde hym lewed and nyce.	Therefore in that I hold him ignorant and foolish.
For whan a man hath over-greet a wit,	For when a man has too great a wit,
Ful oft hym happeth to mysusen it.	Very often he happens to misuse it.
So dooth my lord, and that me greveth soore;	So does my lord, and that sorely grieves me;
God it amende! I kan sey yow namoore."	God amend it! I can tell you no more."
"Ther-of no fors, good Yeman," quod oure Hoost;	"That does not matter, good Yeoman," said our Host;
"Syn of the konnyng of thy lord thow woost,	"Since thou knowest of the cunning of thy lord,
Telle how he dooth, I pray thee hertely,	Tell how he does, I pray thee heartily,
Syn that he is so crafty and so sly.	Since he is so crafty and so sly.
Where dwelle ye, if it to telle be?"	Where do you dwell, if it can be told?"
"In the suburbes of a toun," quod he,	"In the outskirts of a town," said he,
"Lurkynge in hernes and in lanes blynde,	"Lurking in hiding places and in dead-end alleys,
Whereas thise robbours and thise theves by kynde	Where these robbers and these thieves by nature
Holden hir pryvee fereful residence,	Hold their private fearful residence,
As they that dar nat shewen hir presence;	Like those who dare not show their presence;
So faren we, if I shal seye the sothe."	So fare we, if I shall say the truth."
"Now," quod oure Hoost, "yit lat me talke to the.	"Now," said our Host, "yet let me talk to thee.
Why artow so discoloured of thy face?"	Why art thou so discolored in thy face?"
"Peter!" quod he, "God yeve it harde grace,	"Peter!" said he, "God give it bad luck,
I am so used in the fyr to blowe	I am so used to blow in the fire
That it hath chaunged my colour, I trowe.	That it has changed my color, I believe.
I am nat wont in no mirour to prie,	I am not accustomed to peer in any mirror,
But swynke soore and lerne multiplie.	But to work hard and to learn to transmute metals.
We blondren evere and pouren in the fir,	We blunder ever and stare in the fire,
And for al that we faille of oure desir,	And despite all that, we fail to achieve our desire,
For evere we lakken oure conclusioun.	For ever we lack our desired conclusion.
To muchel folk we doon illusioun,	To many folk we do delusion,
And borwe gold, be it a pound or two,	And borrow gold, be it a pound or two,
Or ten, or twelve, or manye sommes mo,	Or ten, or twelve, or many greater sums,
And make hem wenen, at the leeste weye,	And make them believe, at the very least,
That of a pound we koude make tweye.	That of one pound we could make two.
Yet is it fals, but ay we han good hope	Yet is it false, but always we have good hope
It for to doon, and after it we grope.	To do it, and after it we grope.
But that science is so fer us biforn,	But that knowledge is so far ahead of us,
We mowen nat, although we hadden it sworn,	We can not, although we had sworn it,
It overtake, it slit awey so faste.	Overtake it, it slides away so fast.
It wole us maken beggers atte laste."	It will make us beggars at the last."
Whil this Yeman was thus in his talkyng,	While this Yeoman was thus in his talking,
This Chanoun drough hym neer and herde al thyng	This Canon drew himself nearer and heard every thing
Which this Yeman spak, for suspecioun	Which this Yeoman spoke, for suspicion
Of mennes speche evere hadde this Chanoun.	Of men's speech ever had this Canon.
For Catoun seith that he that gilty is	For Cato says that he who is guilty
Demeth alle thyng be spoke of hym, ywis.	Believes every thing is spoken about him, indeed.
That was the cause he gan so ny hym drawe	That was the cause he did draw himself so near
To his Yeman, to herknen al his sawe.	To his Yeoman, to hear all his speech.
And thus he seyde unto his Yeman tho:	And thus he said unto his Yeoman then:
"Hoold thou thy pees and spek no wordes mo,	"Hold thou thy peace and speak no more words,
For if thou do, thou shalt it deere abye.	For if thou do, thou shalt dearly pay for it.
Thou sclaundrest me heere in this compaignye,	Thou slanderest me here in this company,
And eek discoverest that thou sholdest hyde."	And also revealest what thou shouldest hide."
"Ye," quod oure Hoost, "telle on, what so bityde.	"Yes," said our Host, "tell on, whataever may happen.
Of al his thretyng rekke nat a myte!"	Reckon all his threatening not worth a fraction of a penny!"
"In feith," quod he, "namoore I do but lyte."	"In faith," said he, "I do (reckon him) but little any more."
And whan this Chanon saugh it wolde nat bee,	And when this Canon saw it would not be,
But his Yeman wolde telle his pryvetee,	But that his Yeoman would tell his secrets,
He fledde awey for verray sorwe and shame.	He fled away for true sorrow and shame.
"A!" quod the Yeman, "heere shal arise game;	"Ah!" said the Yeoman, "here shall arise some amusement;
Al that I kan anon now wol I telle.	Right now I will tell all that I know.
Syn he is goon, the foule feend hym quelle!	Since he is gone, may the foul fiend kill him!
For nevere heerafter wol I with hym meete	For never hereafter will I meet with him
For peny ne for pound, I yow biheete.	For penny nor for pound, I promise you.
He that me broghte first unto that game,	He who brought me first unto that game,
Er that he dye, sorwe have he and shame!	Before he dies, may he have sorrow and shame!
For it is ernest to me, by my feith;	For it is serious (not game) to me, by my faith;
That feele I wel, what so any man seith.	That feel I well, whatever any man says.
And yet, for al my smert and al my grief,	And yet, for all my pain and all my grief,
For al my sorwe, labour, and meschief,	For all my sorrow, labor, and mischief,
I koude nevere leve it in no wise.	I could never leave it in any way.
Now wolde God my wit myghte suffise	Now I wish to God my wit might suffice
To tellen al that longeth to that art!	To tell all that belongs to that art!
But nathelees yow wol I tellen part.	But nonetheless you desire that I tell part.
Syn that my lord is goon, I wol nat spare;	Since my lord is gone, I will not spare;
Swich thyng as that I knowe, I wol declare.	Such things as what I know, I will declare.
Heere endeth the Prologe of the Chanouns Yemannes Tale .	Here ends the Prologue of the Canon's Yeoman's Tale.
Heere bigynneth the Chanouns Yeman his Tale.	Here begins the Canon's Yeoman's Tale.
Prima Pars	Prima Pars
With this Chanoun I dwelt have seven yeer,	With this Canon I have dwelt seven years,
And of his science am I never the neer.	And as to his science I am never the nearer (to success).
Al that I hadde I have lost therby,	All that I had I have lost thereby,
And, God woot, so hath many mo than I.	And, God knows, so have many more than I.
Ther I was wont to be right fressh and gay	Where I was accustomed to be right fresh and gay
Of clothyng and of oother good array,	Of clothing and of other splendid furnishings,
Now may I were an hose upon myn heed;	Now may I wear a hose upon my head;
And wher my colour was bothe fressh and reed,	And whereas my color was both fresh and red,
Now is it wan and of a leden hewe --	Now is it pale and of a leaden hue --
Whoso it useth, soore shal he rewe! --	Whoever uses it (that art), sorely shall he rue! --
And of my swynk yet blered is myn ye.	And by my work yet my eye is bleared.
Lo, which avantage is to multiplie!	Lo, how profitable it is to transute metals!
That slidynge science hath me maad so bare	That slippery science has made me so bare
That I have no good, wher that evere I fare;	That I have no possessions, wherever I fare;
And yet I am endetted so therby	And yet by this I am so indebted
Of gold that I have borwed, trewely,	For gold that I have borrowed, truly,
That whil I lyve I shal it quite nevere.	That while I live I shall never repay it.
Lat every man be war by me for evere!	Let every man be warned by me forever!
What maner man that casteth hym therto,	Whatever sort of man that applies himself to that,
If he continue, I holde his thrift ydo.	If he continue, I consider his prosperity done for.
For so helpe me God, therby shal he nat wynne,	For so help me God, he shall not profit thereby,
But empte his purs and make his wittes thynne.	But empty his purse and make his wits thin.
And whan he thurgh his madnesse and folye	And when he through his madness and folly
Hath lost his owene good thurgh jupartye,	Has lost his own possessions in this dangerous business,
Thanne he exciteth oother folk therto,	Then he incites other folk to that,
To lesen hir good as he hymself hath do.	To lose their possessions as he himself has done.
For unto shrewes joye it is and ese	For unto scoundrels it is joy and ease
To have hir felawes in peyne and disese.	To have their fellows in pain and hardship.
Thus was I ones lerned of a clerk.	Thus was I once taught by a clerk.
Of that no charge; I wol speke of oure werk.	No matter about that; I will speak of our work.
Whan we been there as we shul exercise	When we are where we shall exercise
Oure elvysshe craft, we semen wonder wise,	Our mysterious craft, we seem wonderfully wise,
Oure termes been so clergial and so queynte.	Our terms are so scholarly and so strange.
I blowe the fir til that myn herte feynte.	I blow the fire until my heart faints.
What sholde I tellen ech proporcion	Why should I tell each proportion
Of thynges whiche that we werche upon --	Of the things that we work upon --
As on fyve or sixe ounces, may wel be,	As on five or six ounces, it may well be,
Of silver, or som oother quantitee --	Of silver, or some other quantity --
And bisye me to telle yow the names	And busy myself to tell you the names
Of orpyment, brent bones, iren squames,	Of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), burned bones, iron flakes,
That into poudre grounden been ful smal;	That are ground into very fine powder;
And in an erthen pot how put is al,	And how all is put in an earthen pot,
And salt yput in, and also papeer,	And salt put in, and also pepper,
Biforn thise poudres that I speke of heer;	Before these powders that I speak of here;
And wel ycovered with a lampe of glas;	And well covered with a lamp-shaped vessel of glass;
And of muche oother thyng which that ther was;	And of many other things which were there;
And of the pot and glasses enlutyng	And sealing of the pot and glasses
That of the eyr myghte passe out nothyng;	So that not a bit of the air could pass out;
And of the esy fir, and smart also,	And of the slow fir, and fast also,
Which that was maad, and of the care and wo	Which was made, and of the care and woe
That we hadde in oure matires sublymyng,	That we had in purifying our materials,
And in amalgamyng and calcenyng	And in blending and reducing to powder
Of quyksilver, yclept mercurie crude?	Of quicksilver, called raw mercury?
For alle oure sleightes we kan nat conclude.	Despite all our tricks we can not succeed.
Oure orpyment and sublymed mercurie,	Our orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), and purified mercury,
Oure grounden litarge eek on the porfurie,	Our litharge (lead monoxide) ground also on the porphyry mortar,
Of ech of thise of ounces a certeyn --	A certain number of ounces of each of these --
Noght helpeth us; oure labour is in veyn.	Nothing helps us; our labor is in vain.
Ne eek oure spirites ascencioun,	Also neither our spirit's vaporization,
Ne oure materes that lyen al fix adoun,	Nor our materials that remain fixed in the pot,
Mowe in oure werkyng no thyng us availle,	Can in any way help us in our working,
For lost is al oure labour and travaille;	For all our labor and travail is lost;
And al the cost, a twenty devel waye,	And all the expenditure, in the name of twenty devils,
Is lost also, which we upon it laye.	Which we spent upon it, is lost also.
Ther is also ful many another thyng	There is also very many another thing
That is unto oure craft apertenyng.	That pertains unto our craft.
Though I by ordre hem nat reherce kan,	Though I can not list them in their proper order,
By cause that I am a lewed man,	Because I am an unlearned man,
Yet wol I telle hem as they come to mynde,	Yet will I tell them as they come to mind,
Thogh I ne kan nat sette hem in hir kynde:	Though I can not set them in their proper categories:
As boole armonyak, verdegrees, boras,	Such as armenian bol (red clay), verdigris (copper acetate), borax,
And sondry vessels maad of erthe and glas,	And various vessels made of clay and glass,
Oure urynales and oure descensories,	Our urinals and our retorts,
Violes, crosletz, and sublymatories,	Vials, crucibles, and sublimation vessels,
Cucurbites and alambikes eek,	Vessels for distilling and alembics also,
And othere swiche, deere ynough a leek --	And other such things, very expensive at the price of a leek --
Nat nedeth it for to reherce hem alle --	There ia no need to list them all --
Watres rubifiyng, and boles galle,	Liquids that cause reddening, and bull's gall,
Arsenyk, sal armonyak, and brymstoon;	Arsenic, sal ammoniac, and brimstone;
And herbes koude I telle eek many oon,	And herbs could I tell also many a one,
As egremoyne, valerian, and lunarie,	Such as agrimony, valerian, and moonwort,
And othere swiche, if that me liste tarie;	And other such things, if I wanted to tarry;
Oure lampes brennyng bothe nyght and day,	Our lamps burning both night and day,
To brynge aboute oure purpos, if we may;	To bring about our purpose, if we can;
Oure fourneys eek of calcinacioun,	Also our furnace for reducing substances to powder,
And of watres albificacioun;	And of whitening by liquids;
Unslekked lym, chalk, and gleyre of an ey,	Unslaked lime, chalk, and white of an egg,
Poudres diverse, asshes, donge, pisse, and cley,	Various powders, ashes, dung, piss, and clay,
Cered pokkets, sal peter, vitriole,	Waxed (waterproofed) packets, saltpeter, sulphuric acid,
And diverse fires maad of wode and cole;	And various sorts of fires made of wood and coal;
Sal tartre, alkaly, and sal preparat,	Potassium nitrate, alkali, and purified salt,
And combust materes and coagulat;	And burned materials and solidified;
Cley maad with hors or mannes heer, and oille	Clay made with horse or man's hair, and oil
Of tartre, alum glas, berme, wort, and argoille,	Of tartar, crystallized alum, yeast, unfermented malt, and argol,
Resalgar, and oure materes enbibyng,	Arsenic, and soaking our materials,
And eek of oure materes encorporyng,	And also of forming a compound of our materials,
And of oure silver citrinacioun,	And of turning our silver to a yellow color,
Oure cementyng and fermentacioun,	Our fusion by heat and fermentation,
Oure yngottes, testes, and many mo.	Our casting molds, crucibles for testing, and many more.
I wol yow telle, as was me taught also,	I will tell you, as it was taught also to me,
The foure spirites and the bodies sevene,	The four spirits and the seven metals
By ordre, as ofte I herde my lord hem nevene.	By order, as often I heard my lord name them.
The firste spirit quyksilver called is,	The first spirit is called quicksilver,
The seconde orpyment, the thridde, ywis,	The second orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), the third, indeed,
Sal armonyak, and the ferthe brymstoon.	Sal ammoniac, and the fourth brimstone.
The bodyes sevene eek, lo, hem heere anoon:	The seven metals also, lo, hear them now:
Sol gold is, and Luna silver we insist,	Sun is gold, and Moon silver we say,
Mars iren, Mercurie quyksilver we clepe,	Mars iron, Mercury we call quicksilver,
Saturnus leed, and Juppiter is tyn,	Saturn lead, and Jupiter is tin,
And Venus coper, by my fader kyn!	And Venus copper, by my father's kin!
This cursed craft whoso wole excercise,	Whoever will exercise this cursed craft,
He shal no good han that hym may suffise,	He shall have no wealth that can be enough for him,
For al the good he spendeth theraboute	For all the wealth he spends on this
He lese shal; therof have I no doute.	He shall lose; of that have I no doubt.
Whoso that listeth outen his folie,	Whoever desires to make public his folly,
Lat hym come forth and lerne multiplie;	Let him come forth and learn to transmute base metals;
And every man that oght hath in his cofre,	And every man that has anything in his strong-box,
Lat hym appiere and wexe a philosophre.	Let him appear and become an alchemist.
Ascaunce that craft is so light to leere?	Is that craft were so easy to learn?
Nay, nay, God woot, al be he monk or frere,	Nay, nay, God knows, be he monk or friar,
Preest or chanoun, or any oother wyght,	Priest or canon, or any other creature,
Though he sitte at his book bothe day and nyght	Though he sit at his book both day and night
In lernyng of this elvysshe nyce loore,	In learning of this mysterious foolish lore,
Al is in veyn, and parde, muchel moore.	All is in vain, and by God, much more.
To lerne a lewed man this subtiltee --	To teach an ignorant man this ingenious skill --
Fy! Spek nat therof, for it wol nat bee.	Fie! Speak not about that, for it will not be.
And konne he letterure or konne he noon,	And know he book learning or know he none,
As in effect, he shal fynde it al oon.	In fact, he shall find it all the same.
For bothe two, by my savacioun,	For both of the two, by my salvation,
Concluden in multiplicacioun	Conclude in transmutation
Ylike wel, whan they han al ydo;	Equally well, when they are all done;
This is to seyn, they faillen bothe two.	This is to say, they fail, both of the two.
Yet forgat I to maken rehersaille	Yet I forgot to make enumeration
Of watres corosif, and of lymaille,	Of acidic waters, and of metal filings,
And of bodies mollificacioun,	And of the softening of materials,
And also of hire induracioun;	And also of their hardening;
Oilles, ablucions, and metal fusible --	Oils, cleansings, and fusible metal --
To tellen al wolde passen any bible	To tell all would be longer than any large book
That owher is; wherfore, as for the beste,	That is anywhere; therefore, as for the best,
Of alle thise names now wol I me reste,	Of all these names now I will rest myself,
For, as I trowe, I have yow toold ynowe	For, as I believe, I have told you enough
To reyse a feend, al looke he never so rowe.	To raise a fiend, though he look never so rough.
A! Nay! Lat be; the philosophres stoon,	Ah! Nay! Let be; the philosophers' stone,
Elixer clept, we sechen faste echoon;	Called Elixir, we seek earnestly each one of us;
For hadde we hym, thanne were we siker ynow.	For if we had it, then we would be very well off.
But unto God of hevene I make avow,	But unto God of heaven I make avow,
For al oure craft, whan we han al ydo,	Despite all our craft, when we have all done,
And al oure sleighte, he wol nat come us to.	And all our skill, he will not come us to.
He hath ymaad us spenden muchel good,	He has made us spend much money,
For sorwe of which almoost we wexen wood,	For sorrow of which we almost go mad,
But that good hope crepeth in oure herte,	Except that good hope creeps into our heart,
Supposynge evere, though we sore smerte,	Supposing ever, though we sorely suffer,
To be releeved by hym afterward.	To be relieved by him afterward.
Swich supposyng and hope is sharp and hard;	Such supposing and hope is sharp and hard;
I warne yow wel, it is to seken evere.	I warn you well, it is to keep seeking forever.
That futur temps hath maad men to dissevere,	That future tense has made men to be separated,
In trust therof, from al that evere they hadde.	In trust on that, from all that ever they had.
Yet of that art they kan nat wexen sadde,	Yet of that art they can not be satisfied,
For unto hem it is a bitter sweete --	For unto them it is a bitter sweet --
So semeth it -- for nadde they but a sheete	So it seems -- for had they nothing but a sheet
Which that they myghte wrappe hem inne a-nyght,	Which they might wrap themselves in at night,
And a brat to walken inne by daylyght,	And a rough cloak to walk in by daylight,
They wolde hem selle and spenden on this craft.	They would sell them and spend it on this craft.
They kan nat stynte til no thyng be laft.	They can not stop until nothing is left.
And everemoore, where that evere they goon,	And evermore, wherever they go,
Men may hem knowe by smel of brymstoon.	Men can know them by the smell of brimstone.
For al the world they stynken as a goot;	For all the world they stink like a goat;
Hir savour is so rammyssh and so hoot	Their odor is so like a goat and so intense
That though a man from hem a mile be,	That though a man be a mile from them,
The savour wole infecte hym, trusteth me.	The odor will infect him, trust me.
Lo, thus by smellyng and threedbare array,	Lo, thus by smelling and threadbare array,
If that men liste, this folk they knowe may.	If men so desire, this folk they can know.
And if a man wole aske hem pryvely	And if a man will ask them privily
Why they been clothed so unthriftily,	Why they are clothed so poorly,
They right anon wol rownen in his ere,	They right away will whisper in his ear,
And seyn that if that they espied were,	And say that if they were recognized,
Men wolde hem slee by cause of hir science.	Men would slay them because of their knowledge.
Lo, thus this folk bitrayen innocence!	Lo, thus these folk betray innocence!
Passe over this; I go my tale unto.	Pass over this; I go unto my tale.
Er that the pot be on the fir ydo,	Before the pot on the fire is done,
Of metals with a certeyn quantitee,	With a specific quantity of metals,
My lord hem tempreth, and no man but he --	My lord tempers them, and no man but he --
Now he is goon, I dar seyn boldely --	Now he is gone, I dare say boldly --
For, as men seyn, he kan doon craftily.	For, as men say, he can work craftily.
Algate I woot wel he hath swich a name;	Although I know well he has such a reputation;
And yet ful ofte he renneth in a blame.	And yet very often he gets in trouble.
And wite ye how? Ful ofte it happeth so	And do you know how? Full often it so happens
The pot tobreketh, and farewel, al is go!	The pot shatters, and farewell, all is gone!
Thise metals been of so greet violence	These metals are of such great violence
Oure walles mowe nat make hem resistence,	The sides of our vessels can not make resistance to them,
But if they weren wroght of lym and stoon;	Unless they were made of lime and stone;
They percen so, and thurgh the wal they goon.	They pierce so, and through the wall they go.
And somme of hem synken into the ground --	And some of them sink into the ground --
Thus han we lost by tymes many a pound --	Thus have we quickly lost many a pound --
And somme are scatered al the floor aboute;	And some are scattered all over the floor;
Somme lepe into the roof. Withouten doute,	Some leap into the roof. Without doubt,
Though that the feend noght in oure sighte hym shewe,	Though the fiend does not show himself to our sight,
I trowe he with us be, that ilke shrewe!	I believe he is with us, that same scoundrel!
In helle, where that he is lord and sire,	In hell, where he is lord and sire,
Nis ther moore wo, ne moore rancour ne ire.	There is no greater woe, nor greater rancor nor ire.
Whan that oure pot is broke, as I have sayd,	When our pot is broken, as I have said,
Every man chit and halt hym yvele apayd.	Every man chides and considers himsef ill used.
Somme seyde it was long on the fir makyng;	Some said it was due to the making of the fire;
Somme seyde nay, it was on the blowyng --	Some said nay, it was due to the blowing --
Thanne was I fered, for that was myn office.	Then was I afraid, for that was my job.
"Straw!" quod the thridde, "ye been lewed and nyce.	"Rubbish!" said the third, "you are ignorant and foolish.
It was nat tempred as it oghte be."	It was not tempered as it ought to be."
"Nay," quod the fourthe, "stynt and herkne me.	"Nay," said the fourth, "be quiet and listen to me.
By cause oure fir ne was nat maad of beech,	Because our fire was not made of beech,
That is the cause and oother noon, so thee'ch!"	That is the cause and none other, as I may prosper!"
I kan nat telle wheron it was long,	I can not tell what it was due to,
But wel I woot greet strif is us among.	But well I know great strife is among us.
"What," quod my lord, "ther is namoore to doone;	"Well," said my lord, "there is no more to do;
Of thise perils I wol be war eftsoone.	Of these perils I will be wary next time.
I am right siker that the pot was crased.	I am very sure that the pot was cracked.
Be as be may, be ye no thyng amased;	Be as be may, be you in no way amazed;
As usage is, lat swepe the floor as swithe,	As our practice is, have the floor quickly swept,
Plukke up youre hertes and beeth glad and blithe."	Pluck up your hearts and be glad and blithe."
The mullok on an heep ysweped was,	The rubbish was swept in a heap,
And on the floor ycast a canevas,	And on the floor was cast a canvas,
And al this mullok in a syve ythrowe,	And all this rubbish thrown in a sieve
And sifted, and ypiked many a throwe.	And sifted, and picked over many a time.
"Pardee," quod oon, "somwhat of oure metal	"By God," said one, "something of our metal
Yet is ther heere, though that we han nat al.	Yet is there here, though we have not all.
And though this thyng myshapped have as now,	And though this thing may have turned out badly this time,
Another tyme it may be well ynow.	Another time it may go well indeed.
Us moste putte oure good in aventure.	We must put our possessions at risk.
A marchant, pardee, may nat ay endure,	A merchant, by God, may not endure forever,
Trusteth me wel, in his prosperitee.	Trust me well, in his prosperity.
Somtyme his good is drowned in the see,	Sometimes his goods are drowned in the sea,
And somtyme comth it sauf unto the londe."	And sometime they come safely unto the land."
"Pees!" quod my lord, "the nexte tyme I wol fonde	"Quiet!" said my lord, "the next time I will endeavor
To bryngen oure craft al in another plite,	To bring our experiment to an entirely different state,
And but I do, sires, lat me han the wite.	And unless I do, sirs, let me have the blame.
Ther was defaute in somwhat, wel I woot."	There was something wrong, I well know."
Another seyde the fir was over-hoot --	Another said the fire was too hot --
But, be it hoot or coold, I dar seye this,	But, be it hot or cold, I dare say this,
That we concluden everemoore amys.	That we conclude always with something gone wrong.
We faille of that which that we wolden have,	We fail to get that which we want to have,
And in oure madnesse everemoore we rave.	And in our madness always we rave.
And whan we been togidres everichoon,	And when we are all together every one,
Every man semeth a Salomon.	Every man seems a Solomon.
But al thyng which that shineth as the gold	But every thing thah shines like gold
Nis nat gold, as that I have herd told;	Is not gold, as I have heard said;
Ne every appul that is fair at eye	Nor every apple that is fair to the eye
Ne is nat good, what so men clappe or crye.	Is not good, whatever men may chatter or cry.
Right so, lo, fareth it amonges us:	Right so, lo, it fares among us:
He that semeth the wiseste, by Jhesus,	He who seems the wisest, by Jesus,
Is moost fool, whan it cometh to the preef;	Is the greatest fool, when it comes to the proof;
And he that semeth trewest is a theef.	And he that seems truest is a thief.
That shul ye knowe, er that I fro yow wende,	That shall you know, before I from you wend,
By that I of my tale have maad an ende.	By the time that I have made an end of my tale.
Explicit prima pars	Ther is a chanoun of religioun
There is a canon regular	Amonges us, wolde infecte al a toun,
Amongst us, who would infect a whole town,	Thogh it as greet were as was Nynyvee,
Though it were as big as was Nineveh,	Rome, Alisaundre, Troye, and othere three.
Rome, Alexandria, Troy, and any three others.	His sleightes and his infinite falsnesse
His tricks and his infinite falseness	Ther koude no man writen, as I gesse,
No man could write, as I guess,	Though that he myghte lyve a thousand yeer.
Though he might live a thousand years.	In al this world of falshede nis his peer,
In all this world is not his equal in falsehood,	For in his termes he wol hym so wynde,
For in his technical terms he will so wrap himself,	And speke his wordes in so sly a kynde,
And speak his words in so deceitful a manner,	Whanne he commune shal with any wight,
When he shall converse with any person,	That he wol make hym doten anonright,
That he will make a fool of him right away,	But it a feend be, as hymselven is.
Unless it be a fiend, as he himself is.	Ful many a man hath he bigiled er this,
Very many a man has he beguiled before this,	And wole, if that he lyve may a while;
And will, if he may live a while longer;	And yet men ride and goon ful many a mile
And yet men ride and walk very many a mile	Hym for to seke and have his aqueyntaunce,
To seek him and have his acquaintance,	Noght knowynge of his false governaunce.
Not knowing of his false way of life.	And if yow list to yeve me audience,
And if you want to listen to me,	I wol it tellen heere in youre presence.
I will tell it here in your presence.	But worshipful chanons religious,
But worshipful religious canons,	Ne demeth nat that I sclaundre youre hous,
Do not think that I slander your house,	Although that my tale of a chanoun bee.
Although my tale be about a canon.	Of every ordre som shrewe is, pardee,
There is some scoundrel in every order, by God,	And God forbede that al a compaignye
And God forbid that a whole company	Sholde rewe o singuleer mannes folye.
Should suffer for one single man's folly.	To sclaundre yow is no thyng myn entente,
To slander you is not at all my intention,	But to correcten that is mys I mente.
But I mean to correct what is amiss.	This tale was nat oonly toold for yow,
This tale was not only told for you,	But eek for othere mo; ye woot wel how
But also for many others; you know well	That among Cristes apostelles twelve
That among Christ's twelve apostles	Ther nas no traytour but Judas hymselve.
There was no traitor but Judas himself.	Thanne why sholde al the remenant have a blame
Then why should all the remnant have the blame	That giltlees were? By yow I seye the same,
Who were guiltless? Concerning you I say the same,	Save oonly this, if ye wol herkne me:
Save only this, if you will listen to me:	If any Judas in youre covent be,
If any Judas be in your convent,	Remoeveth hym bitymes, I yow rede,
Remove him quickly, I advise you,	If shame or los may causen any drede.
If the prospect of shame or dishonor can cause any fear.	And beeth no thyng displesed, I yow preye,
And be not at all displeased, I pray you,	But in this cas herkneth what I shal seye.
But in this case listen to what I shall say.	In Londoun was a preest, an annueleer,
In London was a priest, a chantry priest,	That therinne dwelled hadde many a yeer,
Who therein had dwelled many a year,	Which was so plesaunt and so servysable
Who was so pleasant and so attentive	Unto the wyf, where as he was at table,
Unto the woman, where he took his meals,	That she wolde suffre hym no thyng for to paye
That she would not allow him to pay anything	For bord ne clothyng, wente he never so gaye,
For board nor clothing, went he never so gay,	And spendyng silver hadde he right ynow.
And he had plenty of spending money.	Therof no fors; I wol procede as now,
That does not not matter; I will now proceed,	And tell forth my tale of the canon
That broghte this preest to confusioun.	Who brought this priest to ruin.
This false chanon cam upon a day	This false canon came upon one day
Unto this preestes chambre, wher he lay,	Unto this priest's chamber, where he stayed,
Bisechynge hym to lene hym a certeyn	Beseeching him to lend him a certain amount
Of gold, and he wolde quite it hym ageyn.	Of gold, and he would pay it back to him again.
"Leene me a marc," quod he, "but dayes three,	"Loan me a mark," said he, "for only three days,
And at my day I wol it quiten thee.	And at my assigned day I will repay it to thee.
And if so be that thow me fynde fals,	And if it so be that thou find me false,
Another day do hange me by the hals!"	The next day have me hanged by the neck!"
This preest hym took a marc, and that as swithe,	This priest gave him a mark, and that very quickly,
And this chanoun hym thanked ofte sithe,	And this canon thanked him many times,
And took his leve, and wente forth his weye,	And took his leave, and went forth on his way,
And at the thridde day broghte his moneye,	And at the third day brought his money,
And to the preest he took his gold agayn,	And to the priest he gave back his gold,
Wherof this preest was wonder glad and fayn.	For which this priest was wonderfully glad and happy.
"Certes," quod he, "no thyng anoyeth me	"Certainly," said he, "in no way does it annoy me
To lene a man a noble, or two, or thre,	To lend a man a noble, or two, or three,
Or what thyng were in my possessioun,	Or whatever thing if it were in my possession,
Whan he so trewe is of condicioun	When he is so true, of such character
That in no wise he breke wole his day;	That in no way will he fail to pay on his assigned day:
To swich a man I kan never seye nay."	To such a man I can never say no."
"What!" quod this chanoun, "sholde I be untrewe?	"What!" said this canon, "should I be untrue?
Nay, that were thyng yfallen al of newe.	Nay, that would be a thing completely without precedent.
Trouthe is a thyng that I wol evere kepe	My pledged word is a thing that I will always keep
Unto that day in which that I shal crepe	Until that day in which I shall creep
Into my grave, and ellis God forbede.	Into my grave, and God forbid it be otherwise.
Bileveth this as siker as your Crede.	Believe this is as true as your Creed.
God thanke I, and in good tyme be it sayd,	I thank God, and rightly it may be said,
That ther was nevere man yet yvele apayd	That there was never man yet suffered evil
For gold ne silver that he to me lente,	For gold or silver that he lent to me,
Ne nevere falshede in myn herte I mente.	Nor did I ever intend falsehood in my heart.
And sire," quod he, "now of my pryvetee,	And sir," said he, "now some of my secrets,
Syn ye so goodlich han been unto me,	Since you have been so goodly unto me,
And kithed to me so greet gentillesse,	And shown to me such great courtesy,
Somwhat to quyte with youre kyndenesse	Something with which to repay your kindness
I wol yow shewe, and if yow list to leere,	I will show you, and if you want to learn,
I wol yow teche pleynly the manere	I will teach you fully the manner
How I kan werken in philosophie.	How I know how to to work in alchemy.
Taketh good heede; ye shul wel seen at ye	Pay cl,ose attention; you shall well see by eye
That I wol doon a maistrie er I go."	That I will do a masterful work before I go."
"Ye," quod the preest, "ye, sire, and wol ye so?	"Yes," said the priest, "yes, sir, and will you so?
Marie, therof I pray yow hertely."	By Saint Mary, for that I pray you heartily."
"At youre comandement, sire, trewely,"	"At your commandment, sir, truly,"
Quod the chanoun, "and ellis God forbeede!"	Said the canon, "and otherwise God forbid!"
Loo, how this theef koude his service beede!	Lo, how this thief could offer his service!
Ful sooth it is that swich profred servyse	Very true it is that such a favor not asked for
Stynketh, as witnessen thise olde wyse,	Stinks, as these old wise writers bear witness,
And that ful soone I wol it verifie	And very soon I will verify it
In this chanoun, roote of al trecherie,	In (the deeds of) this canon, root of all treachery,
That everemoore delit hath and gladnesse --	Who evermore has delight and gladness --
Swiche feendly thoghtes in his herte impresse --	Such fiendish thoughts in his heart are fixed --
How Cristes peple he may to meschief brynge.	How he can bring Christ's people to mischief.
God kepe us from his false dissymulynge!	God keep us from his false dissimulation!
Noght wiste this preest with whom that he delte,	This priest knew not with whom he dealt,
Ne of his harm comynge he no thyng felte.	And of his coming harm he felt nothing.
O sely preest! O sely innocent!	O hapless priest! O hapless innocent!
With coveitise anon thou shalt be blent!	Very soon thou shalt be blinded by greed!
O gracelees, ful blynd is thy conceite,	O unfortunate, completely blind is thy mind,
No thyng ne artow war of the deceite	In no way art thou aware of the deceit
Which that this fox yshapen hath to thee!	Which this fox has destined for thee!
His wily wrenches thou ne mayst nat flee.	His cunning deceptions thou canst not flee.
Wherfore, to go to the conclusion,	Therefore, to go to the conclusion,
That refereth to thy confusion,	That refers to thy ruin,
Unhappy man, anon I wol me hye	Unhappy man, right now I will hasten myself
To tellen thyn unwit and thy folye,	To tell thy lack of prudence and thy folly,
And eek the falsnesse of that oother wrecche,	And also the falseness of that other wretch,
As ferforth as that my konnyng wol strecche.	Insofar as my skill will stretch.
This chanon was my lord, ye wolden weene?	This canon was my lord, you would suppose?
Sire hoost, in feith, and by the hevenes queene,	Sir host, in faith, and by the heaven's queen,
It was another chanoun, and nat hee,	It was another canon, and not he,
That kan an hundred foold moore subtiltee.	Who knows a hundred times more trickery.
He hath bitrayed folkes many tyme;	He has betrayed folks many a time;
Of his falsnesse it dulleth me to ryme.	It distresses me to compose rimes about his falseness.
Evere whan that I speke of his falshede,	Every time I speak of his falsehood,
For shame of hym my chekes wexen rede.	For shame of him my cheeks grow red.
Algates they bigynnen for to glowe,	At least they begin to glow,
For reednesse have I noon, right wel I knowe,	For redness have I none, very well I know,
In my visage; for fumes diverse	In my visage; for various fumes
Of metals, whiche ye han herd me reherce,	Of metals, which you have heard me rehearse,
Consumed and wasted han my reednesse.	That have consumed and wasted my redness.
Now taak heede of this chanons cursednesse!	Now pay attention to this canon's cursedness!
"Sire," quod he to the preest, "lat youre man gon	"Sir," said he to the priest, "have your man go
For quyksilver, that we it hadde anon;	For quicksilver, would that we had it right now;
And lat hym bryngen ounces two or three;	And have him bring two or three ounces;
And whan he comth, as faste shal ye see	And when he comes, quickly you shall see
A wonder thyng, which ye saugh nevere er this."	A wonderful thing, which you never saw before this."
"Sire," quod the preest, "it shal be doon, ywis."	"Sir," said the priest, "it shall be done, indeed."
He bad his servant fecchen hym this thyng,	He bad his servant fetch him this thing,
And he al redy was at his biddyng,	And he was all ready at his bidding,
And wente hym forth, and cam anon agayn	And went forth, and came right back again
With this quyksilver, shortly for to sayn,	With this quicksilver, shortly to say,
And took thise ounces thre to the chanoun;	And gave these three ounces to the canon;
And he hem leyde faire and wel adoun,	And he laid them down neatly and carefully,
And bad the servant coles for to brynge,	And bad the servant to bring coals,
That he anon myghte go to his werkynge.	So that he might go to his working right away.
The coles right anon weren yfet,	The coals right away were fetched,
And this chanoun took out a crosselet	And this canon took out a crucible
Of his bosom, and shewed it to the preest.	From his bosom, and showed it to the priest.
"This instrument," quod he, "which that thou seest,	"This instrument," said he, "which thou seest,
Taak in thyn hand, and put thyself therinne	Take in thy hand, and thyself put therein
Of this quyksilver an ounce, and heer bigynne,	An ounce of this quicksilver, and here begin,
In name of Crist, to wexe a philosofre.	In the name of Christ, to become an alchemist.
Ther been ful fewe to whiche I wolde profre	There are very few to whom I would offer
To shewen hem thus muche of my science.	To show them thus so much of my science.
For ye shul seen heer, by experience,	For you shall see here, by experience,
That this quyksilver I wol mortifye	That this quicksilver I will harden
Right in youre sighte anon, withouten lye,	Right in your sight indeed, without lie,
And make it as good silver and as fyn	And make it as good silver and as fine
As ther is any in youre purs or myn,	As there is any in your purse or mine,
Or elleswhere, and make it malliable;	Or elsewhere, and make it malleable;
And elles holdeth me fals and unable	And otherwise consider me false and unable
Amonges folk for evere to appeere.	For ever to appear amongst folk.
I have a poudre heer, that coste me deere,	I have a powder here, that cost me dearly,
Shal make al good, for it is cause of al	Shall make all good, for it is cause of all
My konnyng, which that I yow shewen shal.	My cunning, which I shall show you.
Voyde youre man, and lat hym be theroute,	Send away your man, and have him be outside,
And shette the dore, whils we been aboute	And shut the door, while we are about
Oure pryvetee, that no man us espie,	Our secret business, so that no man espy us,
Whils that we werke in this philosophie."	While we work in this science."
Al as he bad fulfilled was in dede.	All was in deed fulfilled as he commanded.
This ilke servant anonright out yede,	This same servant right away went out,
And his maister shette the dore anon,	And his master shut the door quickly,
And to hire labour spedily they gon.	And to their labor speedily they go.
This preest, at this cursed chanons biddyng,	This priest, at this cursed canon's bidding,
Upon the fir anon sette this thyng,	Upon the fire at once set this thing,
And blew the fir, and bisyed hym ful faste.	And blew the fire, and busied himself very intently.
And this chanoun into the crosselet caste	And this canon into the crucible cast
A poudre, noot I wherof that it was	A powder, I do not know of what it was
Ymaad, outher of chalk, outher of glas,	Made, either of chalk, or of glass,
Or somwhat elles, was nat worth a flye,	Or something else, that was not worth a fly,
To blynde with this preest; and bad hym hye	With which to blind this priest; and bade him hasten
The coles for to couchen al above	To lay all the coals above
The crosselet. "For in tokenyng I thee love,"	The crucible. "To serve as a sign that I love thee,"
Quod this chanoun, "thyne owene handes two	Said this canon, "thine own two hands
Shul werche al thyng which that shal heer be do."	Shall do every thing that shall here be done."
"Graunt mercy," quod the preest, and was ful glad,	"Many thanks," said the priest, and was very glad,
And couched coles as the chanoun bad.	And laid the coals as the canon bad.
And while he bisy was, this feendly wrecche,	And while he was busy, this fiendish wretch,
This false chanoun -- the foule feend hym fecche! --	This false canon -- may the foul fiend fetch him! --
Out of his bosom took a bechen cole,	Out of his bosom took a beech coal,
In which ful subtilly was maad an hole,	In which very skilfully was made a hole,
And therinne put was of silver lemaille	And therein was put of silver filings
An ounce, and stopped was, withouten faille,	An ounce, and was sealed shut, without doubt,
This hole with wex, to kepe the lemaille in.	This hole with wax, to keep the filings in.
And understondeth that this false gyn	And understand that this false device
Was nat maad ther, but it was maad bifore;	Was not made there, but it was made before;
And othere thynges I shal tellen moore	And other things I shall tell more
Herafterward, whiche that he with hym broghte.	Later, which he brought with him.
Er he cam there, hym to bigile he thoghte,	Before he came there, he intended to trick him,
And so he dide, er that they wente atwynne;	And so he did, before they went apart;
Til he had terved hym, koude he nat blynne.	Until he had skinned him, he could not cease.
It dulleth me whan that I of hym speke.	It distresses me when I speak of him.
On his falshede fayn wolde I me wreke,	I would like to avenge myself for his falsehood,
If I wiste how, but he is heere and there;	If I knew how, but he is now here and now there;
He is so variaunt, he abit nowhere.	He is so changeable, he abides nowhere.
But taketh heede now, sires, for Goddes love!	But pay attention now, sirs, for God's love!
He took his cole of which I spak above,	He took his coal of which I spoke above,
And in his hand he baar it pryvely.	And in his hand he bore it secretly.
And whiles the preest couched bisily	And while the priest busily laid
The coles, as I tolde yow er this,	The coals, as I told you before this,
This chanoun seyde, "Freend, ye doon amys.	This canon said, "Friend, you do it wrong.
This is nat couched as it oghte be;	This is not arranged as it ought to be;
But soone I shal amenden it," quod he.	But soon I shall amend it," said he.
"Now lat me medle therwith but a while,	"Now let me work with it but a while,
For of yow have I pitee, by Seint Gile!	For I have pity of you, by Saint Gile!
Ye been right hoot; I se wel how ye swete.	You are very hot; I see well how you sweat.
Have heere a clooth, and wipe awey the wete."	Have here a cloth, and wipe away the wetness."
And whiles that the preest wiped his face,	And while the priest wiped his face,
This chanoun took his cole -- with sory grace! --	This canon took his coal -- may he have bad luck! --
And leyde it above upon the myddeward	And laid it above, upon the middle
Of the crosselet, and blew wel afterward	Of the crucible, and blew well afterward
Til that the coles gonne faste brenne.	Until the coals began to burn fast.
"Now yeve us drynke," quod the chanoun thenne;	"Now give us drink," said the canon then;
"As swithe al shal be wel, I undertake.	"Soon all shall be well, I guarantee.
Sitte we doun, and lat us myrie make."	Sit we down, and let us make merry."
And whan that this chanounes bechen cole	And when this canon's beech coal
Was brent, al the lemaille out of the hole	Was burned, all the filings out of the hole
Into the crosselet fil anon adoun;	Into the crucible fell right down;
And so it moste nedes, by resoun,	And so it must be necessarily, by reason,
Syn it so evene above couched was.	Since it was placed so exactly above.
But therof wiste the preest nothyng, alas!	But of this the priest knew nothing, alas!
He demed alle the coles yliche good,	He thought all the coals equally good,
For of that sleighte he nothyng understood.	For he understood nothing of that trick.
And whan this alkamystre saugh his tyme,	And when this alchemist saw his time,
"Ris up," quod he, "sire preest, and stondeth by me;	"Rise up," said he, "sir priest, and stand by me;
And for I woot wel ingot have ye noon,	And because I know well you have no ingot,
Gooth, walketh forth, and bryngeth a chalk stoon;	Go, walk forth, and bring a chalk stone;
For I wol make it of the same shap	For I will make it of the same shape
That is an ingot, if I may han hap.	As is an ingot, if I may have such luck.
And bryngeth eek with yow a bolle or a panne	And bring also with you a bowl or a pan
Ful of water, and ye shul se wel thanne	Full of water, and you shall see well then
How that oure bisynesse shal thryve and preeve.	How our business shall thrive and succeed.
And yet, for ye shul han no mysbileeve	And yet, so that you shall have no suspicion
Ne wrong conceite of me in youre absence,	Nor wrong opinion of me in your absence,
I ne wol nat been out of youre presence,	I will not be out of your presence,
But go with yow and come with yow ageyn."	But go with you and come with you again."
The chambre dore, shortly for to seyn,	The chamber door, shortly to say,
They opened and shette, and wente hir weye.	They opened and shut, and went their way.
And forth with hem they carieden the keye,	And forth with them they carried the key,
And coome agayn withouten any delay.	And came back again without any delay.
What sholde I tarien al the longe day?	Why should I tarry all the long day?
He took the chalk and shoop it in the wise	He took the chalk and shaped it in the manner
Of an ingot, as I shal yow devyse.	Of an ingot, as I shall tell you.
I seye, he took out of his owene sleeve	I say, he took out of his own sleeve
A teyne of silver -- yvele moot he cheeve! --	A small bar of silver -- may he have evil luck! --
Which that ne was nat but an ounce of weighte.	Which was not more than an ounce of weight.
And taaketh heede now of his cursed sleighte!	And pay attention now to his cursed trick!
He shoop his ingot in lengthe and in breede	He shaped his ingot in the length and in the breadth
Of this teyne, withouten any drede,	Of this small bar, without any doubt,
So slyly that the preest it nat espide,	So slyly that the priest did not see it,
And in his sleve agayn he gan it hide,	And in his sleeve again he did hide it,
And fro the fir he took up his mateere,	And from the fire he took up his material,
And in th'yngot putte it with myrie cheere,	And put it in the ingot with merry demeanor,
And in the water-vessel he it caste,	And in the pan of water he cast it,
Whan that hym luste, and bad the preest as faste,	When it pleased him, and commanded the priest quickly,
"Loke what ther is; put in thyn hand and grope.	"See what is there; put in thy hand and grope.
Thow fynde shalt ther silver, as I hope."	Thou shalt find there silver, as I believe."
What, devel of helle, sholde it elles be?	What else, devil of hell, should it be?
Shaving of silver silver is, pardee!	Shaving of silver is silver, by God!
He putte his hand in and took up a teyne	He put his hand in and took up a small bar
Of silver fyn, and glad in every veyne	Of pure silver, and glad in every vein
Was this preest, whan he saugh it was so.	Was this priest, when he saw it was so.
"Goddes blessyng, and his moodres also,	"God's blessing, and his mother's also,
And alle halwes, have ye, sire chanoun,"	And all saints, have you (in their protection), sir canon,"
Seyde the preest, "and I hir malisoun,	Said the priest, "and may I have their curse,
But, and ye vouche-sauf to techen me	But, if you condescend to teach me
This noble craft and this subtilitee,	This noble craft and this esoteric art,
I wol be youre in al that evere I may."	I will be yours in all that ever I can."
Quod the chanoun, "Yet wol I make assay	Said the canon, "Yet I will make trial
The seconde tyme, that ye may taken heede	The second time, that you may pay attention
And been expert of this, and in youre neede	And be expert concerning this, and when you are in need
Another day assaye in myn absence	Some other day in my absence to try out
This disciplyne and this crafty science.	This discipline and this ingenious science.
Lat take another ounce," quod he tho,	Let's take another ounce," said he then,
"Of quyksilver, withouten wordes mo,	"Of quicksilver, without more words,
And do therwith as ye han doon er this	And do therewith as you have done before this
With that oother, which that now silver is."	With that other, which now is silver."
This preest hym bisieth in al that he kan	This priest busies himself in all that he knows how
To doon as this chanoun, this cursed man,	To do as this canon, this cursed man,
Comanded hym, and faste blew the fir,	Commanded him, and blew hard on the fire,
For to come to th' effect of his desir.	In order to come to the realization of his desire.
And this chanon, right in the meene while,	And this canon, at exactly the same time,
Al redy was this preest eft to bigile,	Was all ready to beguile this priest again,
And for a contenaunce in his hand he bar	And for show in his hand he bore
An holwe stikke -- taak kep and be war! --	A hollow stick -- pay attention and beware! --
In the ende of which an ounce, and namoore,	In the end of which an ounce, and no more,
Of silver lemaille put was, as bifore	Of silver filings was put, as before
Was in his cole, and stopped with wex weel	Was in his coal, and well sealed shut with wax
For to kepe in his lemaille every deel.	To keep in his filings every bit.
And whil this preest was in his bisynesse,	And while this priest was busy with his work,
This chanoun with his stikke gan hym dresse	This canon with his stick began to go
To hym anon, and his poudre caste in	To him right away, and his powder cast in
As he dide er -- the devel out of his skyn	As he did before-- the devil out of his skin
Hym terve, I pray to God, for his falshede!	Flay him, I pray to God, for his falsehood!
For he was evere fals in thoght and dede --	For he was ever false in thought and deed --
And with this stikke, above the crosselet,	And with this stick, above the crucible,
That was ordeyned with that false jet,	That was prepared with that false contrivance,
He stired the coles til relente gan	He stirred the coals until it began to melt
The wex agayn the fir, as every man,	The wax next to the fire, as every man,
But it a fool be, woot wel it moot nede,	Unless he be a fool, knows well it must by necessity,
And al that in the stikke was out yede,	And all that was in the stick went out,
And in the crosselet hastily it fel.	And into the crucible it quickly fell.
Now, good sires, what wol ye bet than wel?	Now, good sirs, what more will you have?
Whan that this preest thus was bigiled ageyn,	When this priest was thus beguiled again,
Supposynge noght but treuthe, sooth to seyn,	Supposing nothing but truth, sooth to say,
He was so glad that I kan nat expresse	He was so glad that I can not express
In no manere his myrthe and his gladnesse;	In any manner his mirth and his gladness;
And to the chanoun he profred eftsoone	And to the canon he offered again
Body and good. "Ye," quod the chanoun soone,	Body and possessions. "Yes," quickly said the canon,
"Though poure I be, crafty thou shalt me fynde.	"Though I be poor, thou shalt find me skilfull.
I warne thee, yet is ther moore bihynde.	I warn thee, there is yet more to come.
Is ther any coper herinne?" seyde he.	Is there any copper here?" said he.
"Ye," quod the preest, "sire, I trowe wel ther be."	"Yes," said the priest, "sir, I believe well there is some."
"Elles go bye us som, and that as swithe;	"Otherwise go buy us some, and do that quickly;
Now, goode sire, go forth thy wey and hy the."	Now, good sir, go forth thy way and hurry thee."
He wente his wey, and with the coper cam,	He went his way, and with the copper came back,
And this chanon it in his handes nam,	And this canon took it in his hands,
And of that coper weyed out but an ounce.	And of that copper weighed out only an ounce.
Al to symple is my tonge to pronounce,	All too simple is my tongue to pronounce,
As ministre of my wit, the doublenesse	As servant of my wit, the duplicity
Of this chanoun, roote of alle cursednesse!	Of this canon, root of all cursedness!
He semed freendly to hem that knewe hym noght,	He seemed friendly to those that did not know him,
But he was feendly bothe in werk and thoght.	But he was fiendish both in deed and thought.
It weerieth me to telle of his falsnesse,	It wearies me to tell of his falseness,
And nathelees yet wol I it expresse,	And nonetheless I will yet express it,
To th'entente that men may be war therby,	With the intention that men may be warned by this,
And for noon oother cause, trewely.	And for no other cause, truly.
He putte this ounce of coper in the crosselet,	He put this ounce of copper in the crucible,
And on the fir as swithe he hath it set,	And on the fire quickly he has set it,
And caste in poudre, and made the preest to blowe,	And cast in powder, and made the priest to blow,
And in his werkyng for to stoupe lowe,	And in his working to stoop low,
As he dide er -- and al nas but a jape;	As he did before -- and all was nothing but a trick;
Right as hym liste, the preest he made his ape!	Exactly as he wished, he made the priest his ape!
And afterward in the ingot he it caste,	And afterward he cast the ingot in it,
And in the panne putte it at the laste	And put it at the last into the pan
Of water, and in he putte his owene hand,	Of water, and in he put his own hand,
And in his sleve (as ye biforen-hand	And in his sleeve (as you before-hand
Herde me telle) he hadde a silver teyne.	Heard me tell) he had a small bar of silver.
He slyly took it out, this cursed heyne,	He slyly took it out, this cursed rascal,
Unwityng this preest of his false craft,	This priest not knowing of his false craft,
And in the pannes botme he hath it laft;	And in the pan's bottom he has left it;
And in the water rombled to and fro,	And in the water groped noisily about to and fro,
And wonder pryvely took up also	And wonderfully secretly took up also
The coper teyne, noght knowynge this preest,	The copper bar, this priest not knowing,
And hidde it, and hym hente by the breest,	And hid it, and grabbed him by his coat,
And to hym spak, and thus seyde in his game:	And to him spoke, and thus said jokingly:
"Stoupeth adoun. By God, ye be to blame!	"Stoop down. By God, you are to blame!
Helpeth me now, as I dide yow whileer;	Help me now, as I did you before;
Putte in youre hand, and looketh what is theer."	Put in your hand, and see what is there."
This preest took up this silver teyne anon,	This priest quickly took up this silver bar,
And thanne seyde the chanoun, "Lat us gon	And then said the canon, "Let us go
With thise thre teynes, whiche that we han wroght,	With these three bars, which we have wrought,
To som goldsmyth and wite if they been oght,	To some goldsmith and learn if they are worth anything,
For, by my feith, I nolde, for myn hood,	For, by my faith, I would not (have them), for (the cost of) my hood,
But if that they were silver fyn and good,	Unless they be silver pure and good,
And that as swithe preeved it shal bee."	And that very quickly shall be tested."
Unto the goldsmyth with thise teynes three	Unto the goldsmith with these three bars
They wente and putte thise teynes in assay	They went and put these bars to the test
To fir and hamer; myghte no man seye nay,	Of fire and hammer; no man could say nay,
But that they weren as hem oghte be.	But that they were as they ought to be.
This sotted preest, who was gladder than he?	This deluded priest, who was gladder than he?
Was nevere brid gladder agayn the day,	Was never bird more glad at daybreak,
Ne nyghtyngale, in the sesoun of May,	Nor nightingale in the season of May,
Was nevere noon that luste bet to synge;	Was never none that was more eager to sing;
Ne lady lustier in carolynge,	Nor lady more enthusiastic in singing carols to spring,
Or for to speke of love and wommanhede,	Or to speak of love and womanhood,
Ne knyght in armes to doon an hardy dede,	Nor knight in arms to do a hardy deed,
To stonden in grace of his lady deere,	To stand in the good graces of his dear lady,
Than hadde this preest this soory craft to leere.	Than this priest had to learn this sorry craft.
And to the chanoun thus he spak and seyde:	And to the canon thus he spoke and said:
"For love of God, that for us alle deyde,	"For love of God, Who died for us all,
And as I may deserve it unto yow,	And as I may deserve (to have) it from you,
What shal this receite coste? Telleth now!"	What shall this recipe cost? Tell now!"
"By oure Lady," quod this chanon, "it is deere,	"By our Lady," said this canon, "it is expensive,
I warne yow wel; for save I and a frere,	I warn you well; for except for me and a friar,
In Engelond ther kan no man it make."	There is no man in England who can make it."
"No fors," quod he, "now, sire, for Goddes sake,	"No matter," said he, "now, sir, for God's sake,
What shal I paye? Telleth me, I preye."	What shall I pay? Tell me, I pray."
"Ywis," quod he, "it is ful deere, I seye.	"Indeed," said he, "as I say, it is very expensive.
Sire, at o word, if that thee list it have,	Sir, at one word, if thou want to have it,
Ye shul paye fourty pound, so God me save!	You must pay forty pounds, so help me God!
And nere the freendshipe that ye dide er this	And were it not for the act of friendship that before this you did
To me, ye sholde paye moore, ywis."	To me, you should pay more, indeed."
This preest the somme of fourty pound anon	This priest right away the sum of forty pounds
Of nobles fette, and took hem everichon	Of nobles fetched, and gave every one of them
To this chanoun for this ilke receite.	To this canon for this same recipe.
Al his werkyng nas but fraude and deceite.	All his working was nothing but fraud and deceit.
"Sire preest," he seyde, "I kepe han no loos	"Sir priest," he said, "I do not care to have fame
Of my craft, for I wolde it kept were cloos;	For my craft, for I would that it were kept confidential;
And, as ye love me, kepeth it secree.	And, as you love me, keep it secret.
For, and men knewen al my soutiltee,	For, if men knew of all my esoteric skill,
By God, they wolden han so greet envye	By God, they would have so great envy
To me by cause of my philosophye	Of me because of my science
I sholde be deed; ther were noon oother weye."	I should be dead; there would be no other way."
"God it forbeede," quod the preest, "what sey ye?	"God forbid it," said the priest, "what say you?
Yet hadde I levere spenden al the good	Yet would I rather spend all the wealth
Which that I have, and elles wexe I wood,	That I have, and otherwise I would rather go mad,
Than that ye sholden falle in swich mescheef."	Than that you should fall in such distress."
"For youre good wyl, sire, have ye right good preef,"	"For your good will, sir, you have givem right good proof,"
Quod the chanoun, "and farwel, grant mercy!"	Said the canon, "and farewell, many thanks!"
He wente his wey, and never the preest hym sy	He went his way, and never the priest him saw
After that day; and whan that this preest shoolde	After that day; and when this priest should
Maken assay, at swich tyme as he wolde,	At such time as he wanted, make a trial
Of this receit, farwel! It wolde nat be.	Of this recipe, farewell! It would not work.
Lo, thus byjaped and bigiled was he!	Lo, thus tricked and beguiled was he!
Thus maketh he his introduccioun,	Thus he makes his introductory gambit,
To brynge folk to hir destruccioun.	To bring folk to their destruction.
Considereth, sires, how that, in ech estaat,	Consider, sirs, how, in each social rank,
Bitwixe men and gold ther is debaat	Betwixt men and gold there is conflict
So ferforth that unnethes is ther noon.	So widespread that there is hardly any gold left.
This multiplying blent so many oon	This transmutation blinds so many a one
That in good feith I trowe that it bee	That in good faith I believe that it is
The cause grettest of swich scarsetee.	The greatest cause of such scarcity.
Philosophres speken so mystily	Philosophers speak so mystically
In this craft that men kan nat come therby,	About this craft that men can not come to it,
For any wit that men han now-a-dayes.	For any wit that men have now-a-days.
They mowe wel chiteren as doon jayes,	They may well chatter as do jays,
And in hir termes sette hir lust and peyne,	And in their technical terms set their desire and pain,
But to hir purpos shul they nevere atteyne.	But to their purpose shall they never attain.
A man may lightly lerne, if he have aught,	A man can easily learn, if he have anything,
To multiplie, and brynge his good to naught!	To transmute metals, and bring his wealth to nothing!
Lo! swich a lucre is in this lusty game,	Lo! such a profit is in this pleasing game,
A mannes myrthe it wol turne unto grame,	It will turn a man's mirth into sorrow,
And empten also grete and hevye purses,	And empty also great and heavy purses,
And maken folk for to purchacen curses	And make folk to deserve curses
Of hem that han hir good therto ylent.	Of those who have lent their wealth for that purpose.
O, fy, for shame! They that han been brent,	O, fie, for shame! Those who have been burned,
Allas, kan they nat flee the fires heete?	Alas, can they not flee the fire's heat?
Ye that it use, I rede ye it leete,	You who use it, I advise you let it go,
Lest ye lese al; for bet than nevere is late.	Lest you lose all; for late is better than never.
Nevere to thryve were to long a date.	Never to thrive would be too long a time.
Though ye prolle ay, ye shul it nevere fynde.	Though you search forever, you shall never find it.
Ye been as boold as is Bayard the blynde,	You are as heedless as is Bayard the blind horse,
That blondreth forth and peril casteth noon.	That blunders forth and takes account of no peril.
He is as boold to renne agayn a stoon	He is as likely to run against a stone
As for to goon bisides in the weye.	As to go around it in the road.
So faren ye that multiplie, I seye.	So fare you who multiply, I say.
If that youre eyen kan nat seen aright,	If your eyes can not see clearly,
Looke that youre mynde lakke noght his sight.	See that your mind lacks nothing of its sight.
For though ye looken never so brode and stare,	For though you look never so broadly and stare,
Ye shul nothyng wynne on that chaffare,	You shall gain nothing on that transaction,
But wasten al that ye may rape and renne.	But waste all that you can steal and carry away.
Withdraweth the fir, lest it to faste brenne;	Withdraw the fire, lest it burn too fast;
Medleth namoore with that art, I mene,	Meddle no more with that art, I mean,
For if ye doon, youre thrift is goon ful clene.	For if you do, your prosperity is completely gone.
And right as swithe I wol yow tellen heere	And very quickly I will you tell here
What philosophres seyn in this mateere.	What alchemists say in this matter.
Lo, thus seith Arnold of the Newe Toun,	Lo, thus says Arnold of the New Town,
As his Rosarie maketh mencioun;	As his book Rosari makes mention;
He seith right thus, withouten any lye:	He says right thus, without any lie:
"Ther may no man mercurie mortifie	"There is no man who can harden mercury
But it be with his brother knowlechyng";	Unless it be with his brother's knowledge";
How [be] that he which that first seyde this thyng	Although he who first said this thing
Of philosophres fader was, Hermes;	Was father of philosophers, Hermes Trismegistus;
He seith how that the dragon, doutelees,	He says that the dragon, doubtless,
Ne dyeth nat but if that he be slayn	Does not die unless he be slain
With his brother; and that is for to sayn,	By his brother; and that is to say,
By the dragon, Mercurie, and noon oother	By the dragon, Mercury, and none other
He understood, and brymstoon by his brother,	He understood, and brimstone by his brother,
That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe.	That out of Sol (gold) and Luna (silver) were drawn.
"And therfore," seyde he -- taak heede to my sawe --	"And therefore," said he -- take heed of my words --
"Lat no man bisye hym this art for to seche,	"Let no man busy himself to seek this art,
But if that he th'entencioun and speche	Unless he the meaning and speech
Of philosophres understonde kan;	Of alchemists can understand;
And if he do, he is a lewed man.	And if he do, he is an ignorant man.
For this science and this konnyng," quod he,	For this science and this cunning," said he,
"Is of the secree of the secretes, pardee."	"Concerns the secret of the secrets, by God."
Also ther was a disciple of Plato,	Also there was a disciple of Plato,
That on a tyme seyde his maister to,	That one time said to his master,
As his book Senior wol bere witnesse,	As his book Senior will bear witness,
And this was his demande in soothfastnesse:	And this was his question in truth:
"Telle me the name of the privee stoon."	"Tell me the name of the secret stone."
And Plato answerde unto hym anoon,	And Plato answered unto him straightaway,
"Take the stoon that men name Titanos."	"Take the stone that men name Titanos."
"Which is that?" quod he. "Magnasia is the same,"	"What is that?" said he. "Magnesia is the same,"
Seyde Plato. "Ye, sire, and is it thus?	Said Plato. "Yes, sir, and is it thus?
This is ignotum per ignocius.	This is explaining the unknown by the more unknown.
What is Magnasia, good sire, I yow preye?"	What is Magnesia, good sir, I pray you?"
"It is a water that is maad, I seye,	"It is a liquid that is made, I say,
Of elementes foure," quod Plato.	Of the four elements," said Plato.
"Telle me the roote, good sire," quod he tho,	Good sir," said he then, "Tell me the basic constituent
"Of that water, if it be youre wil."	"Of that liquid, if it be your wish."
"Nay, nay," quod Plato, "certein, that I nyl.	"Nay, nay," said Plato, "certainly, that I will not.
The philosophres sworn were everychoon	The alchemists were sworn every single one
That they sholden discovere it unto noon,	That they should reveal it unto no one,
Ne in no book it write in no manere.	Nor in any book write it in any way.
For unto Crist it is so lief and deere	For unto Christ it is so beloved and dear
That he wol nat that it discovered bee,	That He does not wish that it be discovered,
But where it liketh to his deitee	Except where it is pleasing to his deity
Men for t'enspire, and eek for to deffende	To enlighten men, and also to forbid
Whom that hym liketh; lo, this is the ende."	Whomever he pleases; lo, this is the end."
Thanne conclude I thus, sith that God of hevene	Then I conclude thus, since God of heaven
Ne wil nat that the philosophres nevene	Does not wish that the alchemists should tell
How that a man shal come unto this stoon,	How a man shall come unto this stone,
I rede, as for the beste, lete it goon.	I advise, as for the best, let it go.
For whoso maketh God his adversarie,	For whoever makes God his adversary,
As for to werken any thyng in contrarie	As to do any thing in contrary
Of his wil, certes, never shal he thryve,	To his will, certainly, never shall he thrive,
Thogh that he multiplie terme of his lyve.	Though he practice alchemy all his life.
And there a poynt, for ended is my tale.	And there (put) a period, for my tale is ended.
God sende every trewe man boote of his bale!	God send every true man remedy for his troubles!
"Sire Clerk of Oxenford," oure Hooste sayde,	"Sir Clerk of Oxford," our Host said,
"Ye ryde as coy and stille as dooth a mayde	"You ride as demure and quiet as does a maid
Were newe spoused, sittynge at the bord;	Who is just married, sitting at the banquet table;
This day ne herde I of youre tonge a word.	This day I heard not one word from your tongue.
I trowe ye studie aboute som sophyme;	I suppose you are thinking about some logical problem;
But Salomon seith `every thyng hath tyme.'	But Solomon says `every thing has its time.'
"For Goddes sake, as beth of bettre cheere!	"For God's sake, cheer up!
It is no tyme for to studien heere.	It is no time to study here.
Telle us som myrie tale, by youre fey!	Tell us some merry tale, by your faith!
For what man that is entred in a pley,	For whatever man is entered in a game,
He nedes moot unto the pley assente.	He of necessity must assent unto the rules.
But precheth nat, as freres doon in Lente,	But preach not, as friars do in Lent,
To make us for oure olde synnes wepe,	To make us weep for our old sins,
Ne that thy tale make us nat to slepe.	And let not thy tale put us to sleep.
"Telle us som murie thyng of aventures.	"Tell us some merry thing of adventures.
Youre termes, youre colours, and youre figures,	Your technical terms, your figures of speech, and your rhetorical devices,
Keepe hem in stoor til so be ye endite	Keep them in reserve until it so be that you compose
Heigh style, as whan that men to kynges write.	High style, as when men write to kings.
Speketh so pleyn at this tyme, we yow preye,	Speak so plainly at this time, we pray of you,
That we may understonde what ye seye."	That we can understand what you say."
This worthy clerk benignely answerde:	This worthy clerk graciously answered:
"Hooste," quod he, "I am under youre yerde;	"Host," said he, "I am under your authority;
Ye han of us as now the governance,	You have the governance of us now,
And therfore wol I do yow obeisance,	And therefore will I obey you,
As fer as resoun axeth, hardily.	So far as reason demands, indeed.
I wol yow telle a tale which that I	I will tell you a tale which I
Lerned at Padowe of a worthy clerk,	Learned at Padua from a worthy clerk,
As preved by his wordes and his werk.	As was proven by his words and his work.
He is now deed and nayled in his cheste;	He is now dead and nailed in his coffin;
I prey to God so yeve his soule reste!	I pray to God to give his soul rest.
"Fraunceys Petrak, the lauriat poete,	"Francis Petrarch, the laureate poet,
Highte this clerk, whos rethorike sweete	Was called this clerk, whose sweet rhetoric
Enlumyned al Ytaille of poetrie,	Illuminated all Italy with poetry,
As Lynyan dide of philosophie,	As Lynyan did with philosophy,
Or lawe, or oother art particuler;	Or law, or other specialized field of study;
But Deeth, that wol nat suffre us dwellen heer,	But Death, that will not allow us to remain here,
But as it were a twynklyng of an ye,	But as if it were a twinkling of an eye,
Hem bothe hath slayn, and alle shul we dye.	Has slain them both, and we all shall die.
"But forth to tellen of this worthy man	"But forth to tell of this worthy man
That taughte me this tale, as I bigan,	That taught me this tale, as I began,
I seye that first with heigh stile he enditeth,	I say that first with high style he composes,
Er he the body of his tale writeth,	Before he writes the body of his tale,
A prohemye, in the which discryveth he	A proem, in which he describes
Pemond and of Saluces the contree,	Piedmont and the country of Saluces,
And speketh of Apennyn, the hilles hye,	And speaks of the Apennines, the high hills,
That been the boundes of West Lumbardye,	That are the boundaries of West Lombardy,
And of Mount Vesulus in special,	And of Mount Vesulus in particular,
Where as the Poo out of a welle smal	Where the Po out of a small well
Taketh his firste spryngyng and his sours,	Takes its first springing and its source,
That estward ay encresseth in his cours	That eastward ever increases in its course
To Emele-ward, to Ferrare, and Venyse,	Toward Emelia, to Ferrara, and Venice,
The which a long thyng were to devyse.	Which would be a long thing to relate.
And trewely, as to my juggement,	And truly, as to my judgment,
Me thynketh it a thyng impertinent,	It seems to me a thing irrelevant,
Save that he wole conveyen his mateere;	Save that he wishes to introduce his subject matter;
But this his tale, which that ye may heere."	But this is his tale, which you may hear."
A markys whilom lord was of that lond,	A marquis once was lord of that land,
As were his worthy eldres hym bifore;	As were his worthy elders before him;
And obeisant, ay redy to his hond,	And obedient, ever ready to his hand (to do his commands),
Were alle his liges, bothe lasse and moore.	Were all his subjects, both lesser ranks and nobles.
Thus in delit he lyveth, and hath doon yoore,	Thus in delight he lives, and has done since long before,
Biloved and drad, thurgh favour of Fortune,	Beloved and feared, through favor of Fortune,
Bothe of his lordes and of his commune.	Both by his lords and by his citizenry.
Therwith he was, to speke as of lynage,	Moreover he was, to speak of lineage,
The gentilleste yborn of Lumbardye,	The most noble born in Lombardy,
A fair persone, and strong, and yong of age,	A handsome person, and strong, and young of age,
And ful of honour and of curteisye;	And full of honor and of courtesy;
Discreet ynogh his contree for to gye,	Discreet enough to govern his country,
Save in somme thynges that he was to blame;	Except in some things he was to blame;
And Walter was this yonge lordes name.	And Walter was this young lord's name.
I blame hym thus: that he considered noght	I blame him thus: that he considered not
In tyme comynge what myghte hym bityde,	In time coming what might happen to him,
But on his lust present was al his thoght,	But on his immediate pleasure was all his thought,
As for to hauke and hunte on every syde.	Such as to hawk and hunt on every side.
Wel ny alle othere cures leet he slyde,	Well nigh all other cares he let slip away,
And eek he nolde -- and that was worst of alle --	And also he would not -- and that was worst of all --
Wedde no wyf, for noght that may bifalle.	Wed any woman, for anything that may befall.
Oonly that point his peple bar so soore	Only that point his people took so badly
That flokmeele on a day they to hym wente,	That in groups on one day they went to him,
And oon of hem, that wisest was of loore --	And one of them, that wisest was in learning --
Or elles that the lord best wolde assente	Or else the one that the lord most readily would consent
That he sholde telle hym what his peple mente,	That he should tell him what his people meant,
Or elles koude he shewe wel swich mateere --	Or else he knew well how to present such a matter --
He to the markys seyde as ye shul heere:	He to the marquis said as you shall hear:
"O noble markys, youre humanitee	"O noble marquis, your graciousness
Asseureth us and yeveth us hardinesse,	Makes us confident and gives us boldness,
As ofte as tyme is of necessitee,	As often as it is time (to do so) by necessity,
That we to yow mowe telle oure hevynesse.	That we to you may tell our sorrow.
Accepteth, lord, now of youre gentillesse	Grant, lord, now of your nobility
That we with pitous herte unto yow pleyne,	That we with pitiful heart may unto you complain,
And lat youre eres nat my voys desdeyne.	And let your ears not disdain (to hear) my voice.
"Al have I noght to doone in this mateere	"Although I have nothing to do in this matter
Moore than another man hath in this place,	More than another man has in this place,
Yet for as muche as ye, my lord so deere,	Yet for as much as you, my lord so dear,
Han alwey shewed me favour and grace	Have always shown me favor and grace
I dar the bettre aske of yow a space	I dare the more confidently to ask of you a time
Of audience to shewen oure requeste,	Of hearing to present our request,
And ye, my lord, to doon right as yow leste.	And you, my lord, to do right as it may please you.
"For certes, lord, so wel us liketh yow	"For certainly, lord, so well you please us
And al youre werk, and evere han doon, that we	And all your actions, and ever have done so, that we
Ne koude nat us self devysen how	Could not ourselves imagine how
We myghte lyven in moore felicitee,	We might live in more happiness,
Save o thyng, lord, if it youre wille be,	Save one thing, lord, if it be your will,
That for to been a wedded man yow leste;	That you would desire to be a wedded man;
Thanne were youre peple in sovereyn hertes reste.	Then your people would be in complete peace of mind.
"Boweth youre nekke under that blisful yok	"Bow your neck under that blissful yoke
Of soveraynetee, noght of servyse,	Of sovereignty, not of servitude,
Which that men clepe spousaille or wedlok;	Which men call marriage or wedlock;
And thenketh, lord, among youre thoghtes wyse	And think, lord, among your wise thoughts
How that oure dayes passe in sondry wyse,	How our days pass in various ways,
For thogh we slepe, or wake, or rome, or ryde,	For though we sleep, or wake, or roam, or ride,
Ay fleeth the tyme; it nyl no man abyde.	Ever flees the time; it will wait for no man.
"And thogh youre grene youthe floure as yit,	"And though your green youth flowers as yet,
In crepeth age alwey, as stille as stoon,	In creeps age always, as still as stone,
And deeth manaceth every age, and smyt	And death menaces every age, and smites
In ech estaat, for ther escapeth noon;	In each rank, for there escapes no one;
And al so certein as we knowe echoon	And just as certainly as we know, each one of us,
That we shul deye, as uncerteyn we alle	That we shall die, as uncertain we all
Been of that day whan deeth shal on us falle.	Are of that day when death shall on us fall.
"Accepteth thanne of us the trewe entente,	"Accept then the true intent of us,
That nevere yet refuseden youre heeste,	Who never yet refused your command,
And we wol, lord, if that ye wole assente,	And we will, lord, if you will assent,
Chese yow a wyf, in short tyme atte leeste,	Chose a wife for you, in short time at the least,
Born of the gentilleste and of the meeste	Born of the most noble and of the greatest (in rank)
Of al this land, so that it oghte seme	Of all this land, so that it must seem
Honour to God and yow, as we kan deeme.	Honor to God and you, so far as we can judge.
"Delivere us out of al this bisy drede,	"Deliver us out of all this constant fear,
And taak a wyf, for hye Goddes sake!	And take a wife, for high God's sake!
For if it so bifelle, as God forbede,	For if it so happen, may God forbid,
That thurgh youre deeth youre lyne sholde slake,	That through your death your line should die out,
And that a straunge successour sholde take	And that a foreign successor should take
Youre heritage, O wo were us alyve!	Your heritage, O woe would it be to us in our lifetime!
Wherfore we pray you hastily to wyve."	Wherefore we pray you hastily to take a wife."
Hir meeke preyere and hir pitous cheere	Their meek prayer and their pitiful manner
Made the markys herte han pitee.	Made the marquis's heart have pity.
"Ye wol," quod he, "myn owene peple deere,	"You want," said he, "my own people dear,
To that I nevere erst thoughte streyne me.	That which I never before thought to compel myself.
I me rejoysed of my liberte,	I rejoiced in my liberty,
That seelde tyme is founde in mariage;	That seldom is found in marriage;
Ther I was free, I moot been in servage.	Where I was free, I must be in servitude.
"But nathelees I se youre trewe entente,	"But nevertheless I see your true intent,
And truste upon youre wit, and have doon ay;	And trust upon your intelligence, and always have done so;
Wherfore of my free wyl I wole assente	Therefore of my free will I will assent
To wedde me, as soone as evere I may.	To wed, as soon as ever I can.
But ther as ye han profred me to-day	But insofar as you have offered me to-day
To chese me a wyf, I yow relesse	To choose me a wife, I release you
That choys and prey yow of that profre cesse.	(From making) that choice and pray you to cease (making) that offer.
"For God it woot, that children ofte been	"For God knows it, that children often are
Unlyk hir worthy eldres hem bifore;	Unlike their worthy elders (who came) before them;
Bountee comth al of God, nat of the streen	All goodness comes from God, not from the lineage
Of which they been engendred and ybore.	By which they are conceived and born.
I truste in Goddes bountee, and therfore	I trust in God's goodness, and therefore
My mariage and myn estaat and reste	My marriage and my estate and peace of mind
I hym bitake; he may doon as hym leste.	I entrust to him; he may do as he pleases.
"Lat me allone in chesynge of my wyf --	"Let me alone in the choosing of my wife --
That charge upon my bak I wole endure.	That responsibility upon my back I will endure.
But I yow preye, and charge upon youre lyf,	But I you pray, and order you upon your life,
What wyf that I take, ye me assure	Whatever wife I take, you me assure
To worshipe hire, whil that hir lyf may dure,	To honor her, while her life may endure,
In word and werk, bothe heere and everywheere,	In word and deed, both here and everywhere,
As she an emperoures doghter weere.	As if she were an emperor's daughter.
"And forthermoore, this shal ye swere: that ye	"And furthermore, this shall you swear: that you
Agayn my choys shul neither grucche ne stryve;	Against my choice shall neither grouch nor strive;
For sith I shal forgoon my libertee	For since I must forgo my liberty
At youre requeste, as evere moot I thryve,	At your request, as ever I may thrive,
Ther as myn herte is set, ther wol I wyve;	Where my heart is set, there will I take a wife;
And but ye wole assente in swich manere,	And unless you will assent in such a manner,
I prey yow, speketh namoore of this matere."	I pray you, speak no more of this matter."
With hertely wyl they sworen and assenten	With heartfelt will they swore and assent
To al this thyng -- ther seyde no wight nay --	To all this thing -- there said no person nay --
Bisekynge hym of grace, er that they wenten,	Beseeching him of grace, before they went,
That he wolde graunten hem a certein day	That he would grant them a fixed day
Of his spousaille, as soone as evere he may;	Of his wedding, as soon as ever he can;
For yet alwey the peple somwhat dredde,	For yet always the people somewhat dreaded,
Lest that the markys no wyf wolde wedde.	Lest the marquis no wife would wed.
He graunted hem a day, swich as hym leste,	He granted them a day, such as he pleased,
On which he wolde be wedded sikerly,	On which he would be wedded surely,
And seyde he dide al this at hir requeste.	And said he did all this at their request.
And they, with humble entente, buxomly,	And they, with humble good will, obediently,
Knelynge upon hir knees ful reverently,	Kneeling upon their knees full reverently,
Hym thonken alle; and thus they han an ende	All thanked him; and thus they have a conclusion
Of hire entente, and hoom agayn they wende.	In accord with their wishes, and home again they go.
And heerupon he to his officeres	And thereupon he to his officers
Comaundeth for the feste to purveye,	Commands the feast to prepare,
And to his privee knyghtes and squieres	And to his household knights and squires
Swich charge yaf as hym liste on hem leye;	Gave such orders as he desired to lay on them;
And they to his comandement obeye,	And they to his commandment obey,
And ech of hem dooth al his diligence	And each of them does all his efforts
To doon unto the feeste reverence.	To lend honor unto the feast.
Noght fer fro thilke paleys honurable,	Not far from that same noble palace,
Wher as this markys shoop his mariage,	Where this marquis planned his marriage,
There stood a throop, of site delitable,	There stood a small village, in a delightful location,
In which that povre folk of that village	In which poor folk of that village
Hadden hir beestes and hir herbergage,	Had their beasts and their dwellings
And of hire labour tooke hir sustenance,	And of their labor took their sustenance,
After that the erthe yaf hem habundance.	According to what produce the earth gave them.
Amonges thise povre folk ther dwelte a man	Among these poor folk there dwelt a man
Which that was holden povrest of hem alle;	Who was considered poorest of them all;
But hye God somtyme senden kan	But high God sometimes can send
His grace into a litel oxes stalle;	His grace into a little ox's stall;
Janicula men of that throop hym calle.	Janicula men of that village call him.
A doghter hadde he, fair ynogh to sighte,	A daughter had he, fair enough in appearance,
And Grisildis this yonge mayden highte.	And Griselda this young maiden was called.
But for to speke of vertuous beautee,	But to speak of virtuous beauty,
Thanne was she oon the faireste under sonne;	Then was she the fairest of all under sun;
For povreliche yfostred up was she,	Because she was raised in poverty,
No likerous lust was thurgh hire herte yronne.	No sensual desire had run through her heart.
Wel ofter of the welle than of the tonne	Much more often of the well than of the wine barrel
She drank, and for she wolde vertu plese,	She drank, and because she would satisfy the demands of virtue
She knew wel labour but noon ydel ese.	She knew well labor but no idle ease.
But thogh this mayde tendre were of age,	But though this maid was tender of age,
Yet in the brest of hire virginitee	Yet in the breast of her virginity
Ther was enclosed rype and sad corage;	There was enclosed a mature and steadfast spirit;
And in greet reverence and charitee	And in great reverence and charity
Hir olde povre fader fostred shee.	Her old poor father she cared for.
A fewe sheep, spynnynge, on feeld she kepte;	A few sheep, while spinning, on field she kept;
She wolde noght been ydel til she slepte.	She would not be idle until she slept.
And whan she homward cam, she wolde brynge	And when she homeward came, she would bring
Wortes or othere herbes tymes ofte,	Cabbages or other greens very often,
The whiche she shredde and seeth for hir lyvynge,	Which she shredded and boiled for their sustenance
And made hir bed ful hard and nothyng softe;	And made her bed full hard and not at all soft;
And ay she kepte hir fadres lyf on-lofte	And ever she sustained her father's life
With everich obeisaunce and diligence	With every obedience and diligence
That child may doon to fadres reverence.	That child may do to father's reverence.
Upon Grisilde, this povre creature,	Upon Griselda, this poor creature,
Ful ofte sithe this markys sette his ye	Very many times this marquis set his eye
As he on huntyng rood paraventure;	By chance, as he on hunting rode;
And whan it fil that he myghte hire espye,	And when it happened that he might see her,
He noght with wantown lookyng of folye	He not with lecherous looking of folly
His eyen caste on hire, but in sad wyse	His eyes cast on hire, but in serious manner
Upon hir chiere he wolde hym ofte avyse,	Upon her demeanor he would often think,
Commendynge in his herte hir wommanhede,	Commending in his heart her womanly qualities,
And eek hir vertu, passynge any wight	And also her virtue, passing any person
Of so yong age, as wel in chiere as dede.	Of so young age, as well in manner as deed.
For thogh the peple have no greet insight	For though the people have no great insight
In vertu, he considered ful right	In virtue, he considered very carefully
Hir bountee, and disposed that he wolde	Her goodness, and decided that he would
Wedde hire oonly, if evere he wedde sholde.	Wed her only, if ever he should wed.
The day of weddyng cam, but no wight kan	The day of wedding came, but no person can
Telle what womman that it sholde be;	Tell what woman it should be;
For which merveille wondred many a man,	For which marvel wondered many a man,
And seyden, whan they were in privetee,	And said, when they were in private,
"Wol nat oure lord yet leve his vanytee?	"Will not our lord yet leave his vanity?
Wol he nat wedde? Allas! Allas, the while!	Will he not wed? Alas! Alas, the times!
Why wole he thus hymself and us bigile?"	Why will he thus himself and us deceive?"
But nathelees this markys hath doon make	But nevertheless this marquis has made
Of gemmes, set in gold and in asure,	Of gems, set in gold and in azure,
Brooches and rynges, for Grisildis sake;	Brooches and rings, for Griselda's sake;
And of hir clothyng took he the mesure	And of her clothing he took the measure
By a mayde lyk to hire stature,	By a maid like her (in) stature,
And eek of othere aornementes alle	And also of all other ornaments
That unto swich a weddyng sholde falle.	That unto such a wedding should be appropriate.
The time of undren of the same day	The time of mid-morning of the same day
Approcheth, that this weddyng sholde be,	Approaches, when this wedding should be,
And al the paleys put was in array,	And all the palace was put in proper order,
Bothe halle and chambres, ech in his degree;	Both hall and chambers, each in its turn;
Houses of office stuffed with plentee	Storage buildings stuffed with plenty,
Ther maystow seen, of deyntevous vitaille	There canst thou see, of delicious foods
That may be founde as fer as last Ytaille.	What can be found from as far as farthest Italy.
This roial markys, richely arrayed,	This royal marquis, richly arrayed,
Lordes and ladyes in his compaignye,	Lords and ladies in his company,
The whiche that to the feeste weren yprayed,	Who were invited to the feast,
And of his retenue the bachelrye,	And of his retinue the knights,
With many a soun of sondry melodye,	With many a sound of varied melody,
Unto the village of the which I tolde	Unto the village of which I told
In this array the righte wey han holde.	In this splendid array the direct route have held.
Grisilde of this, God woot, ful innocent,	Griselda of this, God knows, full ignorant,
That for hire shapen was al this array,	That for her was all this splendour prepared,
To fecchen water at a welle is went,	Has gone to fetch water at a well,
And cometh hoom as soone as ever she may;	And comes home as soon as ever she can;
For wel she hadde herd seyd that thilke day	For well she had heard said that same day
The markys sholde wedde, and if she myghte,	The marquis should wed, and if she could,
She wolde fayn han seyn som of that sighte.	She would be happy to have seen some of that sight.
She thoghte, "I wole with othere maydens stonde,	She thought, "I will stand with other maidens,
That been my felawes, in oure dore and se	Who are my fellows, in our door and see
The markysesse, and therfore wol I fonde	The marchioness, and therefore will I try
To doon at hoom, as soone as it may be,	To do at home, as soon as it can be,
The labour which that longeth unto me,	The chores that I must do,
And thanne I may at leyser hire biholde,	And then I may at leisure her behold,
If she this wey unto the castel holde."	If she takes this way to the castle."
And as she wolde over hir threshold gon,	And as she would over her threshold go,
The markys cam and gan hire for to calle;	The marquis came and called her;
And she set doun hir water pot anon,	And she set down her water pot quickly,
Biside the thresshfold, in an oxes stalle,	Beside the threshold, in an ox's stall,
And doun upon hir knes she gan to falle,	And down upon her knees she fell,
And with sad contenance kneleth stille,	And with sober countenance kneels without speaking,
Til she had herd what was the lordes wille.	Until she had heard what was the lord's will.
This thoghtful markys spak unto this mayde	This pensive marquis spoke unto this maid
Ful sobrely, and seyde in this manere:	Full soberly, and said in this manner:
"Where is youre fader, O Grisildis?" he sayde.	"Where is your father, O Griselda?" he said.
And she with reverence, in humble cheere,	And she with reverence, in humble manner,
Answerde, "Lord, he is al redy heere."	Answered, "Lord, he is right here."
And in she gooth withouten lenger lette,	And in she goes without longer delay,
And to the markys she hir fader fette.	And to the marquis she fetched her father.
He by the hand thanne took this olde man,	He by the hand then took this old man,
And seyde thus, whan he hym hadde asyde:	And said thus, when he had him aside:
"Janicula, I neither may ne kan	"Janicula, I neither may nor can
Lenger the plesance of myn herte hyde.	Longer hide the desire of my heart.
If that thou vouche sauf, what so bityde,	If thou agree, whatsoever may happen,
Thy doghter wol I take, er that I wende,	Thy daughter will I take, before I depart,
As for my wyf, unto hir lyves ende.	For my wife, until her life's end.
"Thou lovest me, I woot it wel certeyn,	"Thou lovest me, I know it well for certain,
And art my feithful lige man ybore,	And art my faithful liege man born,
And al that liketh me, I dar wel seyn	And all that pleases me, I dare well say
It liketh thee, and specially therfore	It pleases thee, and specially therefore
Tel me that poynt that I have seyd bifore,	Tell me of that question that I have stated previously,
If that thou wolt unto that purpos drawe,	If thou will agree with that proposal,
To take me as for thy sone-in-lawe."	To take me for thy son-in-law."
This sodeyn cas this man astonyed so	This sudden occurrence this man so astounded
That reed he wax; abayst and al quakynge	That he grew red; abashed and all trembling
He stood; unnethes seyde he wordes mo,	He stood; hardly said he any more words,
But oonly thus: "Lord," quod he, "my willynge	But only thus: "Lord," said he, "my desire
Is as ye wole, ne ayeynes youre likynge	Is as you wish, and against your pleasure
I wol no thyng, ye be my lord so deere;	I will do nothing, you are my lord so dear;
Right as yow lust, governeth this mateere."	Right as you please, govern this matter."
"Yet wol I," quod this markys softely,	"Yet I want," said this marquis softly,
"That in thy chambre I and thou and she	"That in thy chamber I and thou and she
Have a collacioun, and wostow why?	Have a discussion, and knowest thou why?
For I wol axe if it hire wille be	For I will ask if it be her will
To be my wyf and reule hire after me.	To be my wife and conduct herself as I decide.
And al this shal be doon in thy presence;	And all this shall be done in thy presence;
I wol noght speke out of thyn audience."	I will say nothing out of thy hearing."
And in the chambre, whil they were aboute	And in the chamber, while they were engaged in
Hir tretys, which as ye shal after heere,	Their negotiation, which you shall after hear,
The peple cam unto the hous withoute,	The people came unto outside the house,
And wondred hem in how honest manere	And wondered in what a virtuous manner
And tentifly she kepte hir fader deere.	And how attentively she cared for her dear father.
But outrely Grisildis wondre myghte,	But certainly Griselda might wonder,
For nevere erst ne saugh she swich a sighte.	For never before saw she such a sight.
No wonder is thogh that she were astoned	Though it is no wonder that she was astonished
To seen so greet a gest come in that place;	To see so great a guest come in that place;
She nevere was to swiche gestes woned,	She never was accustomed to such guests,
For which she looked with ful pale face.	For which she looked full pale in her face.
But shortly forth this matere for to chace,	But shortly forth this matter to pursue,
Thise arn the wordes that the markys sayde	These are the words that the marquis said
To this benigne, verray, feithful mayde:	To this benign, true, faithful maid:
"Grisilde," he seyde, "ye shal wel understonde	"Griselda," he said, "you shall well understand
It liketh to youre fader and to me	It is pleasing to your father and to me
That I yow wedde, and eek it may so stonde,	That I you wed, and also it may so stand,
As I suppose, ye wol that it so be.	As I suppose, that you desire that it so be.
But thise demandes axe I first," quod he,	But these questions ask I first," said he,
"That, sith it shal be doon in hastif wyse,	"That, since it shall be done in a hasty manner,
Wol ye assente, or elles yow avyse?	Will you assent, or else think it over?
"I seye this: be ye redy with good herte	"I say this: are you ready (to submit) with good heart
To al my lust, and that I frely may,	To all my desires, and that I freely may,
As me best thynketh, do yow laughe or smerte,	As seems best to me, make you laugh or feel pain,
And nevere ye to grucche it, nyght ne day?	And you never to grouch about it, at any time?
And eek whan I sey `ye,' ne sey nat `nay,'	And also when I say `yes,' say not `nay,'
Neither by word ne frownyng contenance?	Neither by word nor frowning countenance?
Swere this, and heere I swere oure alliance."	Swear this, and here I swear our alliance."
Wondrynge upon this word, quakynge for drede,	Wondering upon these words, trembling for fear,
She seyde, "Lord, undigne and unworthy	She said, "Lord, unsuitable and unworthy
Am I to thilke honour that ye me beede,	Am I of that same honor that you offer me,
But as ye wole youreself, right so wol I.	But as you desire yourself, right so desire I.
And heere I swere that nevere willyngly,	And here I swear that never willingly,
In werk ne thoght, I nyl yow disobeye,	In deed nor thought, will I disobey you,
For to be deed, though me were looth to deye."	Even to be dead, though I would hate to die."
"This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he.	"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he.
And forth he gooth with a ful sobre cheere	And forth he goes with a full sober manner
Out at the dore, and after that cam she,	Out of the door, and after that came she,
And to the peple he seyde in this manere:	And to the people he said in this manner:
"This is my wyf," quod he, "that standeth heere.	"This is my wife," said he, "that stands here.
Honoureth hire and loveth hire, I preye,	Honor her and love her, I pray,
Whoso me loveth; ther is namoore to seye."	Whoever loves me; there is no more to say."
And for that no thyng of hir olde geere	And so that nothing of her old belongings
She sholde brynge into his hous, he bad	She should bring into his house, he ordered
That wommen sholde dispoillen hire right theere;	That women should undress her right there;
Of which thise ladyes were nat right glad	Of which these ladies were not very happy
To handle hir clothes, wherinne she was clad.	To handle her clothes, in which she was clad.
But nathelees, this mayde bright of hewe	But nevertheless, this maid bright of hue
Fro foot to heed they clothed han al newe.	From foot to head they have clothed all new.
Hir heris han they kembd, that lay untressed	Her hair have they combed, that lay unkempt
Ful rudely, and with hir fyngres smale	Very crudely, and with their elegant fingers
A corone on hire heed they han ydressed,	A crown on her head they have placed,
And sette hire ful of nowches grete and smale.	And set her garments full of jeweled ornaments of every sort.
Of hire array what sholde I make a tale?	Of her appearance why should I make a long tale?
Unnethe the peple hir knew for hire fairnesse	The hardly people knew her for her beauty
Whan she translated was in swich richesse.	When she was translated into such riches.
This markys hath hire spoused with a ryng	This marquis has espoused her with a ring
Broght for the same cause, and thanne hire sette	Brought for the same purpose, and then set her
Upon an hors, snow-whit and wel amblyng,	Upon a horse, snow-white and with a gentle pace,
And to his paleys, er he lenger lette,	And to his palace, before he longer delayed,
With joyful peple that hire ladde and mette,	With joyful people that led and met her,
Conveyed hire; and thus the day they spende	Conducted her; and thus the day they spend
In revel, til the sonne gan descende.	In revel, until the sun descended.
And shortly forth this tale for to chace,	And shortly forth this tale to pursue,
I seye that to this newe markysesse	I say that to this new marchioness
God hath swich favour sent hire of his grace	God has such favor sent her of his grace
That it ne semed nat by liklynesse	That it seemed not likely
That she was born and fed in rudenesse,	That she was born and fed in humble circumstances,
As in a cote or in an oxe-stalle,	In a peasant's hut or in an ox-stall,
But norissed in an emperoures halle.	But nurtured in an emperor's hall.
To every wight she woxen is so deere	To every person she is grown so dear
And worshipful that folk ther she was bore,	And worshipful that folk where she was born,
And from hire birthe knewe hire yeer by yeere,	And from her birth knew her year by year,
Unnethe trowed they -- but dorste han swore --	They hardly believed -- but dared have sworn --
That to Janicle, of which I spak bifore,	That to Janicle, of whom I spoke before,
She doghter were, for, as by conjecture,	She was daughter, for, by conjecture,
Hem thoughte she was another creature.	They thought she was another creature.
For though that evere vertuous was she,	For though that she was always virtuous,
She was encressed in swich excellence	She was increased in such excellence
Of thewes goode, yset in heigh bountee,	Of good characteristics, set in high goodness,
And so discreet and fair of eloquence,	And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
So benigne and so digne of reverence,	So benign and so worthy of reverence,
And koude so the peples herte embrace,	And could so the people's heart embrace,
That ech hire lovede that looked on hir face.	That each who looked on her face loved her.
Noght oonly of Saluces in the toun	Not only in the town of Saluces
Publiced was the bountee of hir name,	Was made known the praise of her name,
But eek biside in many a regioun,	But also moreover in many a region,
If oon seide wel, another seyde the same;	If one said well, another said the same;
So spradde of hire heighe bountee the fame	So spread the fame of her high goodness
That men and wommen, as wel yonge as olde,	That men and women, as well young as old,
Goon to Saluce upon hire to biholde.	Go to Saluce to look upon her.
Thus Walter lowely -- nay, but roially --	Thus Walter lowly -- nay, but royally --
Wedded with fortunat honestetee,	Wedded with beneficial virtue,
In Goddes pees lyveth ful esily	In God's peace lives full easily
At hoom, and outward grace ynogh had he;	At home, and to all appearances he had sufficient happiness;
And for he saugh that under low degree	And because he saw that under low social rank
Was ofte vertu hid, the peple hym heelde	Was often virtue hid, the people considered him
A prudent man, and that is seyn ful seelde.	A prudent man, and that is seen full seldom.
Nat oonly this Grisildis thurgh hir wit	Not only this Griselda through her wit
Koude al the feet of wyfly hoomlinesse,	Knew all the skills of a housewife's duties,
But eek, whan that the cas required it,	But also, when the situation required it,
The commune profit koude she redresse.	The public good could she promote.
Ther nas discord, rancour, ne hevynesse	There was no discord, rancor, nor sadness
In al that land that she ne koude apese,	In all that land that she could not alleviate,
And wisely brynge hem alle in reste and ese.	And wisely bring them all in rest and ease.
Though that hire housbonde absent were anon,	Though her husband was absent at the time,
If gentil men or othere of hire contree	If noble men or others of her country
Were wrothe, she wolde bryngen hem aton;	Were wroth, she would bring them to agreement;
So wise and rype wordes hadde she,	Such wise and well considered words had she,
And juggementz of so greet equitee,	And judgments of such great justice,
That she from hevene sent was, as men wende,	That she was sent from heaven, as men supposed,
Peple to save and every wrong t'amende.	People to save and every wrong to amend.
Nat longe tyme after that this Grisild	Not long time after this Griselda
Was wedded, she a doghter hath ybore,	Was married, she has borne a daughter,
Al had hire levere have born a knave child;	Although she would rather have given birth to a male child;
Glad was this markys and the folk therfore,	Glad was this marquis and the folk for this,
For though a mayde child coome al bifore,	For though a maid child came all before,
She may unto a knave child atteyne	She may unto a male child attain
By liklihede, syn she nys nat bareyne.	By likelihood, since she is not barren.
Ther fil, as it bifalleth tymes mo,	There happened, as it befalls many times,
Whan that this child had souked but a throwe,	When this child had suckled but a short time,
This markys in his herte longeth so	This marquis in his heart longs so
To tempte his wyf, hir sadnesse for to knowe,	To test his wife, her constancy to know,
That he ne myghte out of his herte throwe	That he could not out of his heart throw
This merveillous desir his wyf t'assaye;	This strange desire to test his wife;
Nedelees, God woot, he thoghte hire for t'affraye.	Needless, God knows, he intended to frighten her.
He hadde assayed hire ynogh bifore,	He had tested her enough before,
And foond hire evere good; what neded it	And found her always good; why was it needed
Hire for to tempte, and alwey moore and moore,	To test her, and always more and more,
Though som men preise it for a subtil wit?	Though some men praise its ingenuity?
But as for me, I seye that yvele it sit	But as for me, I say that it ill befits one
To assaye a wyf whan that it is no nede,	To test a wife when there is no need,
And putten hire in angwyssh and in drede.	And put her in anguish and in dread.
For which this markys wroghte in this manere:	For which this marquis worked in this manner:
He cam allone a-nyght, ther as she lay,	He came alone at night, where she lay,
With stierne face and with ful trouble cheere,	With stern face and with a very troubled manner,
And seyde thus: "Grisilde," quod he, "that day	And said thus: "Griselda," said he, "that day
That I yow took out of youre povere array,	That I took you out of your impoverished situation,
And putte yow in estaat of heigh noblesse --	And put you in the condition of high nobility --
Ye have nat that forgeten, as I gesse?	You have not forgotten that, as I suppose?
"I seye, Grisilde, this present dignitee,	"I say, Griselda, this present high social position,
In which that I have put yow, as I trowe,	In which I have put you, as I believe,
Maketh yow nat foryetful for to be	Requires that you be not forgetful
That I yow took in povre estaat ful lowe,	That I took you in a poor, very humble condition,
For any wele ye moot youreselven knowe.	Despite any present prosperity you must know it yourself.
Taak heede of every word that y yow seye;	Take heed of every word that I say to you;
Ther is no wight that hereth it but we tweye.	There is no person that hears it but we two.
"Ye woot youreself wel how that ye cam heere	"You know well yourself how you came here
Into this hous, it is nat longe ago;	Into this house, it is not long ago;
And though to me that ye be lief and deere,	And though to me you are beloved and dear,
Unto my gentils ye be no thyng so.	Unto my nobles you are not at all so.
They seyn, to hem it is greet shame and wo	They say, to them it is great shame and woe
For to be subgetz and been in servage	To be subjects and be in servitude
To thee, that born art of a smal village.	To thee, that art born in a humble village.
"And namely sith thy doghter was ybore	"And especially since thy daughter was born
Thise wordes han they spoken, doutelees.	These words have they spoken, doubtless.
But I desire, as I have doon bifore,	But I desire, as I have done before,
To lyve my lyf with hem in reste and pees.	To live my life with them in rest and peace.
I may nat in this caas be recchelees;	I can not be imprudent in this case;
I moot doon with thy doghter for the beste,	I must do with thy daughter for the best,
Nat as I wolde, but as my peple leste.	Not as I would want, but as my people desire.
"And yet, God woot, this is ful looth to me;	"And yet, God knows, this is full hateful to me;
But nathelees withoute youre wityng	But nevertheless without your knowledge
I wol nat doon; but this wol I," quod he,	I will not do anything; but this I desire," said he,
"That ye to me assente as in this thyng.	"That you assent to me in this matter.
Shewe now youre pacience in youre werkyng,	Show now in your actions your patience,
That ye me highte and swore in youre village	That you promised me and swore in your village
That day that maked was oure mariage."	That day that our marriage was made."
Whan she had herd al this, she noght ameved	When she had heard all this, she changed not
Neither in word, or chiere, or contenaunce,	Neither in word, nor manner, nor countenance,
For, as it semed, she was nat agreved.	For, as it seemed, she was not aggrieved.
She seyde, "Lord, al lyth in youre plesaunce.	She said, "Lord, all is subject to your pleasure.
My child and I, with hertely obeisaunce,	My child and I, with heart-felt obedience,
Been youres al, and ye mowe save or spille	Are entirely yours, and you may save or kill
Youre owene thyng; werketh after youre wille.	Your own thing; do as you will.
"Ther may no thyng, God so my soule save,	"There can nothing, as God my soul may save,
Liken to yow that may displese me;	Please you that may displease me;
Ne I desire no thyng for to have,	Nor do I desire to have anything,
Ne drede for to leese, save oonly yee.	Nor dread to lose, save only you.
This wyl is in myn herte, and ay shal be;	This will is in my heart, and ever shall be;
No lengthe of tyme or deeth may this deface,	No length of time or death can obliterate this,
Ne chaunge my corage to another place."	Nor change my heart to another place."
Glad was this markys of hire answeryng,	Glad was this marquis of her answer,
But yet he feyned as he were nat so;	But yet he feigned as if he were not so;
Al drery was his cheere and his lookyng,	All sorrowful was his manner and his look,
Whan that he sholde out of the chambre go.	When he had to go out of the chamber.
Soone after this, a furlong wey or two,	Soon after this, in a few minutes,
He prively hath toold al his entente	He privately has told all his plan
Unto a man, and to his wyf hym sente.	Unto a man, and sent him to his wife.
A maner sergeant was this privee man,	A sort of sergeant (policeman) was this confidential servant,
The which that feithful ofte he founden hadde	Whom he had often found faithful
In thynges grete, and eek swich folk wel kan	In important matters, and also such folk well can
Doon execucioun in thynges badde.	Carry out their orders in evil matters.
The lord knew wel that he hym loved and dradde;	The lord knew well that he loved and dreaded him;
And whan this sergeant wiste his lordes wille,	And when this sergeant knew his lord's will,
Into the chambre he stalked hym ful stille.	Into the chamber he stalked very quietly.
"Madame," he seyde, "ye moote foryeve it me,	"Madame," he said, "you must forgive it me,
Though I do thyng to which I am constreyned.	Though I do a thing to which I am constrained.
Ye been so wys that ful wel knowe ye	You are so wise that full well you know
That lordes heestes mowe nat been yfeyned;	That lords' commands may not be evaded (by feigning);
They mowe wel been biwailled or compleyned,	They may well be bewailed or complained of,
But men moote nede unto hire lust obeye,	But men must by necessity unto their desires obey,
And so wol I; ther is namoore to seye.	And so will I; there is no more to say.
"This child I am comanded for to take" --	"This child I am commanded to take" --
And spak namoore, but out the child he hente	And spoke no more, but out the child he seized
Despitously, and gan a cheere make	Mercilessly, and made a face
As though he wolde han slayn it er he wente.	As if he would have slain it before he went.
Grisildis moot al suffre and al consente,	Griselda must suffer all and consent to all,
And as a lamb she sitteth meke and stille,	And as a lamb she sits meek and still,
And leet this crueel sergeant doon his wille.	And let this cruel sergeant do his will.
Suspecious was the diffame of this man,	Suspicious was the bad reputation of this man,
Suspect his face, suspect his word also;	Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
Suspect the tyme in which he this bigan.	Suspect the time in which he this began.
Allas! Hir doghter that she loved so,	Alas! Her daughter that she loved so,
She wende he wolde han slawen it right tho.	She thought he would have slain it right then.
But nathelees she neither weep ne syked,	But nevertheless she neither wept nor sighed,
Conformynge hire to that the markys lyked.	Conforming herself to what the marquis pleased.
But atte laste to speken she bigan,	But at the last she began to speak,
And mekely she to the sergeant preyde,	And meekly she to the sergeant prayed,
So as he was a worthy gentil man,	As he was a worthy gentle man,
That she moste kisse hire child er that it deyde.	That she might kiss her child before it died.
And in hir barm this litel child she leyde	And in her lap this little child she laid
With ful sad face, and gan the child to blisse,	With full sad face, and blessed the child,
And lulled it, and after gan it kisse.	And lulled it, and afterward kissed it.
And thus she seyde in hire benigne voys,	And thus she said in her benign voice,
"Fareweel my child! I shal thee nevere see.	"Farewell my child! I shall thee never see.
But sith I thee have marked with the croys	But since I have marked thee with the cross
Of thilke Fader -- blessed moote he be! --	Of that same Father -- blessed may he be! --
That for us deyde upon a croys of tree,	That for us died upon a cross of wood,
Thy soule, litel child, I hym bitake,	Thy soul, little child, I entrust to him,
For this nyght shaltow dyen for my sake."	For this night shalt thou die for my sake."
I trowe that to a norice in this cas	I believe that to a nurse in this case
It had been hard this reuthe for to se;	It would have been hard this pitiful situation to see;
Wel myghte a mooder thanne han cryd "allas!"	Well might a mother then have cried "alas!"
But nathelees so sad stidefast was she	But nevertheless so firmly steadfast was she
That she endured al adversitee,	That she endured all adversity,
And to the sergeant mekely she sayde,	And to the sergeant meekly she said,
"Have heer agayn youre litel yonge mayde.	"Have here again your little young maid.
"Gooth now," quod she, "and dooth my lordes heeste;	"Go now," said she, "and do my lord's command;
But o thyng wol I prey yow of youre grace,	But one thing will I pray you of your grace,
That, but my lord forbad yow, atte leeste	That, unless my lord forbad you, at the least
Burieth this litel body in som place	Bury this little body in some place
That beestes ne no briddes it torace."	That no beasts nor birds tear it to pieces."
But he no word wol to that purpos seye,	But he no word will say to that proposal,
But took the child and wente upon his weye.	But took the child and went upon his way.
This sergeant cam unto his lord ageyn,	This sergeant came unto his lord again,
And of Grisildis wordes and hire cheere	And of Griselda's words and her manner
He tolde hym point for point, in short and pleyn,	He told him in detail, in short and plain (words),
And hym presenteth with his doghter deere.	And presents him with his daughter dear.
Somwhat this lord hadde routhe in his manere,	Somewhat this lord had pity in his manner,
But nathelees his purpos heeld he stille,	But nevertheless his purpose held he still,
As lordes doon, whan they wol han hir wille;	As lords do, when they will have their will;
And bad this sergeant that he pryvely	And commanded this sergeant that he secretly
Sholde this child softe wynde and wrappe,	Should this child softly wind and wrap (in a blanket),
With alle circumstances tendrely,	With every care tenderly,
And carie it in a cofre or in a lappe;	And carry it in a box or in a folded cloth;
But, upon peyne his heed of for to swappe,	But, upon pain of having his head cut off,
That no man sholde knowe of his entente,	No man should know of his intention,
Ne whenne he cam, ne whider that he wente;	Nor whence he came, nor whither he went;
But at Boloigne to his suster deere,	But at Bologna to his sister dear,
That thilke tyme of Panik was countesse,	Who at that very time was countess of Panik,
He sholde it take and shewe hire this mateere,	He should take it and explain to her this matter,
Bisekynge hire to doon hire bisynesse	Beseeching her to do her best
This child to fostre in alle gentillesse;	This child to nurture in all noble manners;
And whos child that it was he bad hire hyde	And whose child that it was he commanded her to hide
From every wight, for oght that may bityde.	From every person, for anything that may happen.
The sergeant gooth, and hath fulfild this thyng;	The sergeant goes, and has fulfilled this order;
But to this markys now retourne we.	But to this marquis we now return.
For now gooth he ful faste ymaginyng	For now he goes very intently considering
If by his wyves cheere he myghte se,	If by his wife's appearance he might see,
Or by hire word aperceyve, that she	Or by her word perceive, if she
Were chaunged; but he nevere hire koude fynde	Were changed; but he never could find her
But evere in oon ylike sad and kynde.	Anything but always the same, alike steadfast and kind.
As glad, as humble, as bisy in servyse,	As glad, as humble, as diligent in service,
And eek in love, as she was wont to be,	And also in love, as she was accustomed to be,
Was she to hym in every maner wyse;	Was she to him in every sort of way;
Ne of hir doghter noght a word spak she.	Nor of her daughter not a word spoke she.
Noon accident, for noon adversitee,	No external sign, for any adversity,
Was seyn in hire, ne nevere hir doghter name	Was seen in her, and never her daughter's name
Ne nempned she, in ernest nor in game.	Mentioned she, in earnest nor in jest (in any way).
In this estaat ther passed been foure yeer	In this condition there are passed four years
Er she with childe was, but, as God wolde,	Before she was with child, but, as God would,
A knave child she bar by this Walter,	A male child she bore by this Walter,
Ful gracious and fair for to biholde.	Very gracious and beautiful in appearance.
And whan that folk it to his fader tolde,	And when folk told it to his father,
Nat oonly he but al his contree merye	Not only he but all his country merry
Was for this child, and God they thanke and herye.	Was for this child, and God they thank and praise.
Whan it was two yeer old, and fro the brest	When it was two years old, and from the breast
Departed of his norice, on a day	Of his nurse weaned, on one day
This markys caughte yet another lest	This marquis caught yet another desire
To tempte his wyf yet ofter, if he may.	To test his wife yet again, if he can.
O nedelees was she tempted in assay!	O needless was she put to the test!
But wedded men ne knowe no mesure,	But wedded men know no moderation,
Whan that they fynde a pacient creature.	When they find a patient creature.
"Wyf," quod this markys, "ye han herd er this	"Wife," said this marquis, "you have heard before this
My peple sikly berth oure mariage;	My people are unhappy with our marriage;
And namely sith my sone yboren is,	And especially since my son is born,
Now is it worse than evere in al oure age.	Now is it worse than ever in all our lives.
The murmur sleeth myn herte and my corage,	The grumbling slays my heart and my feelings,
For to myne eres comth the voys so smerte	For to my ears comes the voice so sharply
That it wel ny destroyed hath myn herte.	That it well nigh has destroyed my heart.
"Now sey they thus: `Whan Walter is agon,	"Now say they thus: `When Walter is gone,
Thanne shal the blood of Janicle succede	Then shall the blood of Janicle succeed
And been oure lord, for oother have we noon.'	And be our lord, for we have no other.'
Swiche wordes seith my peple, out of drede.	Such words say my people, no doubt.
Wel oughte I of swich murmur taken heede,	Well ought I of such grumbling take heed,
For certeinly I drede swich sentence,	For certainly I dread such opinion,
Though they nat pleyn speke in myn audience.	Though they speak not plainly in my hearing.
"I wolde lyve in pees, if that I myghte;	"I would live in peace, if I could;
Wherfore I am disposed outrely,	Therefore I am firmly resolved,
As I his suster servede by nyghte,	As I dealt with his sister by night,
Right so thenke I to serve hym pryvely.	Right so I intend to deal with him secretly.
This warne I yow, that ye nat sodeynly	This I warn you, so that you not suddenly
Out of youreself for no wo sholde outreye;	For any woe should break out in a passion;
Beth pacient, and therof I yow preye."	Be patient, and for that I pray you."
"I have," quod she, "seyd thus, and evere shal:	"I have," said she, "said thus, and ever shall:
I wol no thyng, ne nyl no thyng, certayn,	I want nothing, nor will not want any thing, certainly,
But as yow list. Naught greveth me at al,	But as you desire. It does not grieve me at all,
Though that my doughter and my sone be slayn --	Though my daughter and my son be slain --
At youre comandement, this is to sayn.	At your commandment, this is to say.
I have noght had no part of children tweyne	I have not had any part of children two
But first siknesse, and after, wo and peyne.	But first sickness, and after, woe and pain.
"Ye been oure lord; dooth with youre owene thyng	"You are our lord; do with your own thing
Right as yow list; axeth no reed at me.	Right as you desire; ask no advice from me.
For as I lefte at hoom al my clothyng,	For as I left at home all my clothing,
Whan I first cam to yow, right so," quod she,	When I first came to you, right so," said she,
"Lefte I my wyl and al my libertee,	"Left I my will and all my liberty,
And took youre clothyng; wherfore I yow preye,	And took your clothing; wherefore I you pray,
Dooth youre plesaunce; I wol youre lust obeye.	Do your pleasure; I will obey your desire.
"And certes, if I hadde prescience	"And certainly, if I had foreknowledge
Youre wyl to knowe, er ye youre lust me tolde,	To know your will, before you told me your desire,
I wolde it doon withouten necligence;	I would do it without negligence;
But now I woot youre lust, and what ye wolde,	But now I know your desire, and what you want,
Al youre plesance ferme and stable I holde;	All your pleasure (whatever you wish) firm and stable I hold;
For wiste I that my deeth wolde do yow ese,	For if I knew that my death would do you ease,
Right gladly wolde I dyen, yow to plese.	Right gladly would I die, to please you.
"Deth may noght make no comparisoun	"Death can not make any comparison (is nothing compared)
Unto youre love." And whan this markys say	Unto your love." And when this marquis saw
The constance of his wyf, he caste adoun	The constancy of his wife, he cast down
His eyen two, and wondreth that she may	His eyes two, and wonders that she can
In pacience suffre al this array;	In patience suffer all this treatment;
And forth he goth with drery contenance,	And forth he goes with sorrowful countenance,
But to his herte it was ful greet plesance.	But to his heart it was full great pleasure.
This ugly sergeant, in the same wyse	This ugly sergeant, in the same manner
That he hire doghter caughte, right so he --	That he her daughter seized, right so he --
Or worse, if men worse kan devyse --	Or worse, if one can worse imagine --
Hath hent hire sone, that ful was of beautee.	Has seized her son, that was full of beauty.
And evere in oon so pacient was she	And continually so patient was she
That she no chiere maade of hevynesse,	That she made no appearance of sadness,
But kiste hir sone, and after gan it blesse;	But kissed her son, and afterwards it blessed;
Save this, she preyede hym that, if he myghte,	Save this, she prayed him that, if he could,
Hir litel sone he wolde in erthe grave	Her little son he would bury in earth
His tendre lymes, delicaat to sighte,	His tender limbs, pleasing in appearance,
Fro foweles and fro beestes for to save.	From birds and from beasts to save.
But she noon answere of hym myghte have.	But she no answer of him might have.
He wente his wey, as hym no thyng ne roghte,	He went his way, as if he cared nothing about it,
But to Boloigne he tendrely it broghte.	But to Bologna he tenderly brought it.
This markys wondred, evere lenger the moore,	This marquis wondered, more and more,
Upon hir pacience, and if that he	Upon her patience, and if he
Ne hadde soothly knowen therbifoore	Had not truly known before this
That parfitly hir children loved she,	That she perfectly loved her children,
He wolde have wend that of som subtiltee,	He would have supposed that by some trickery,
And of malice, or for crueel corage,	And out of malice, or for hard heart,
That she hadde suffred this with sad visage.	That she had suffered this with calm manner.
But wel he knew that next hymself, certayn,	But well he knew that next to himself, certainly,
She loved hir children best in every wyse.	She loved her children best in every way.
But now of wommen wolde I axen fayn	But now I would like to ask of women
If thise assayes myghte nat suffise?	If these tests might not suffice?
What koude a sturdy housbonde moore devyse	What could a cruel husband more devise
To preeve hir wyfhod and hir stedefastnesse,	To test her wifehood and her steadfastness,
And he continuynge evere in sturdinesse?	And he continuing ever in cruelty?
But ther been folk of swich condicion	But there are folk of such disposition
That whan they have a certein purpos take,	That when they have a certain purpose taken,
They kan nat stynte of hire entencion,	They can not refrain from their intention,
But, right as they were bounden to that stake,	But, right as if they were bound to that stake,
They wol nat of that firste purpos slake.	They will not from that original plan desist.
Right so this markys fulliche hath purposed	Right so this marquis has firmly decided
To tempte his wyf as he was first disposed.	To test his wife as he was first disposed.
He waiteth if by word or contenance	He watches to see if by word or countenance
That she to hym was changed of corage,	That she to him was changed in heart,
But nevere koude he fynde variance.	But never could he find variation.
She was ay oon in herte and in visage,	She was always the same in heart and in visage,
And ay the forther that she was in age,	And ever the further that she was in age,
The moore trewe, if that it were possible,	The more true, if it were possible,
She was to hym in love, and moore penyble.	She was to him in love, and more attentive.
For which it semed thus: that of hem two	For which it seemed thus: that of them two
Ther nas but o wyl, for as Walter leste,	There was but one will, for as Walter desired,
The same lust was hire plesance also.	The same desire was her pleasure also.
And, God be thanked, al fil for the beste.	And, God be thanked, all fell for the best.
She shewed wel, for no worldly unreste	She proved good; for no worldly discomfort
A wyf, as of hirself, nothing ne sholde	A wife, concerning herself, nothing should
Wille in effect, but as hir housbonde wolde.	Desire in fact, except what her husband would want.
The sclaundre of Walter ofte and wyde spradde,	The ill fame of Walter spread often and wide,
That of a crueel herte he wikkedly,	That of a cruel heart he wickedly,
For he a povre womman wedded hadde,	Because he had wedded a poor woman,
Hath mordred bothe his children prively.	Has murdered both his children secretly.
Swich murmur was among hem comunly.	Such grumbling was among them unanimously.
No wonder is, for to the peples ere	No wonder is, for to the people's ear
Ther cam no word but that they mordred were.	There came no word but that they were murdered.
For which, where as his peple therbifore	For which, whereas his people before this
Hadde loved hym wel, the sclaundre of his diffame	Had loved him well, the disgrace of his bad reputation
Made hem that they hym hatede therfore.	Made them so that they hated him for this.
To been a mordrere is an hateful name;	To be a murderer is (to have) a hateful reputation;
But nathelees, for ernest ne for game,	But nevertheless, not for any reason,
He of his crueel purpos nolde stente;	Would he of his cruel purpose desist;
To tempte his wyf was set al his entente.	To test his wife was set all his intention.
Whan that his doghter twelve yeer was of age,	When his daughter was twelve years of age,
He to the court of Rome, in subtil wyse	He to the court of Rome, (which was) in a cunning manner
Enformed of his wyl, sente his message,	Informed of his real purpose, sent his messenger,
Comaundynge hem swiche bulles to devyse	Commanding them such papal bulls to devise
As to his crueel purpos may suffyse --	As to his cruel purpose may suffice --
How that the pope, as for his peples reste,	How the pope, to restore tranquility for his people,
Bad hym to wedde another, if hym leste.	Commanded him to wed another, if he pleased.
I seye, he bad they sholde countrefete	I say, he commanded they should counterfeit
The popes bulles, makynge mencion	The pope's bulls, making mention
That he hath leve his firste wyf to lete,	That he has permission to leave his first wife,
As by the popes dispensacion,	As by the pope's dispensation,
To stynte rancour and dissencion	To stint rancor and dissension
Bitwixe his peple and hym; thus seyde the bulle,	Between his people and him; thus said the bull,
The which they han publiced atte fulle.	Which they have published widely.
The rude peple, as it no wonder is,	The ignorant people, as it no wonder is,
Wenden ful wel that it hadde be right so;	Supposed full well that it had been right so;
But whan thise tidynges came to Grisildis,	But when these tidings came to Griselda,
I deeme that hire herte was ful wo.	I believe that her heart was very woeful.
But she, ylike sad for everemo,	But she, continuously steadfast for evermore,
Disposed was, this humble creature,	Disposed was, this humble creature,
The adversitee of Fortune al t'endure,	To endure all the adversity of Fortune,
Abidynge evere his lust and his plesance,	Enduring ever his desire and his pleasure,
To whom that she was yeven herte and al,	To whom she was given, heart and all,
As to hire verray worldly suffisance.	As her true worldly source of satisfaction.
But shortly if this storie I tellen shal,	But shortly if this story I tell shall,
This markys writen hath in special	This marquis written has in detail
A lettre, in which he sheweth his entente,	A letter, in which he reveals his intention,
And secreely he to Boloigne it sente.	And secretly he sent it to Bologna.
To the Erl of Panyk, which that hadde tho	To the Earl of Panyk, who had then
Wedded his suster, preyde he specially	Wedded his sister, prayed he specifically
To bryngen hoom agayn his children two	To bring home again his two children
In honurable estaat al openly.	In a noble public display.
But o thyng he hym preyede outrely,	But one thing he him prayed earnestly,
That he to no wight, though men wolde enquere,	That he to no one, though men would inquire,
Sholde nat telle whos children that they were,	Should tell whose children they were,
But seye the mayden sholde ywedded be	But say the maiden should wedded be
Unto the Markys of Saluce anon.	Unto the Marquis of Saluce immediately.
And as this erl was preyed, so dide he;	And as this earl was asked, so did he;
For at day set he on his wey is goon	For at the set day he on his way is gone
Toward Saluce, and lordes many oon	Toward Saluce, and lords many a one
In riche array, this mayden for to gyde,	In rich array, this maiden to guide,
Hir yonge brother ridynge hire bisyde.	Her young brother riding beside her.
Arrayed was toward hir mariage	Adorned was in preparation for her marriage
This fresshe mayde, ful of gemmes cleere;	This lovely maid, (her clothing) full of bright gems;
Hir brother, which that seven yeer was of age,	Her brother, who was seven years of age,
	Arrayed eek ful fressh in his manere.
Adorned also full handsomely in his manner.	And thus in greet noblesse and with glad cheere,
And thus in great nobility and with a glad manner,	Toward Saluces shapynge hir journey,
Toward Saluces directing their journey,	Fro day to day they ryden in hir wey.
From day to day they ride on their way.	Among al this, after his wikke usage,
Meanwhile, in accord with his wicked usage,	This markys, yet his wyf to tempte moore
This marquis, yet his wife to test more	To the outtreste preeve of hir corage,
To the utmost test of her heart,	Fully to han experience and loore
Fully to have experience and knowledge	If that she were as stidefast as bifoore,
If she were as steadfast as before,	He on a day in open audience
He on a certain day in the hearing of all	Ful boistously hath seyd hire this sentence:
Full rudely has said to her this speech:	"Certes, Grisilde, I hadde ynogh plesance
"Certainly, Griselda, I had enough pleasure	To han yow to my wyf for youre goodnesse,
To have you as my wife for your goodness,	As for youre trouthe and for youre obeisance,
As for your truth and for your obedience	Noght for youre lynage, ne for youre richesse;
Not for your lineage, nor for your riches;	But now knowe I in verray soothfastnesse
But now know I in true certainty	That in greet lordshipe, if I wel avyse,
That in great lordship, if I judge rightly,	Ther is greet servitute in sondry wyse.
There is great servitude in various ways.	"I may nat doon as every plowman may.
"I can not do as every plowman may.	My peple me constreyneth for to take
My people constrain me to take	Another wyf, and crien day by day;
Another wife, and complain day by day;	And eek the pope, rancour for to slake,
And also the pope, to quench rancor,	Consenteth it -- that dar I undertake --
Consents to it -- that dare I assert --	And trewely thus muche I wol yow seye:
And truly thus much I will say to you:	My newe wyf is comynge by the weye.
My new wife is coming by the way.	"Be strong of herte, and voyde anon hir place;
"Be strong of heart, and vacate her place immediately;	And thilke dowere that ye broghten me,
And that dowry that you brought me,	Taak it agayn; I graunte it of my grace.
Take it back; I grant it of my grace.	Retourneth to youre fadres hous," quod he;
Return to your father's house," said he;	"No man may alwey han prosperitee.
"No one can always have prosperity.	With evene herte I rede yow t'endure
With tranquil heart I advise you to endure	The strook of Fortune or of aventure."
The stroke of Fortune or of chance."	And she agayn answerde in pacience:
And she in reply answered in patience:	"My lord," quod she, "I woot, and wiste alway,
"My lord," said she, "I know, and knew always,	How that bitwixen youre magnificence
How between your magnificence	And my poverte no wight kan ne may
And my poverty no person can nor may	Maken comparison; it is no nay.
Make comparison; it cannot be denied.	I ne heeld me nevere digne in no manere
I considered myself never worthy in any way	To be youre wyf, no, ne youre chamberere.
To be your wife, no, nor your chambermaid.	"And in this hous, ther ye me lady maade --
"And in this house, where you made me the lady --	The heighe God take I for my witnesse,
The high God I take for my witness,	And also wysly he my soule glaade --
And as surely as he my soul may gladden --	I nevere heeld me lady ne mistresse,
I never considered myself lady nor mistress,	But humble servant to youre worthynesse,
But humble servant to your worthiness,	And evere shal, whil that my lyf may dure,
And ever shall, while my life may endure,	Aboven every worldly creature.
Above every worldly creature.	"That ye so longe of youre benignitee
"That you so long of your benignity	Han holden me in honour and nobleye,
Have maintained me in honor and nobility,	Where as I was noght worthy for to bee,
Where I was not worthy to be,	That thonke I God and yow, to whom I preye
For that I thank you and God, to Whom I pray	Foryelde it yow; ther is namoore to seye.
To reward you for it; there is no more to say.	Unto my fader gladly wol I wende,
Unto my father gladly will I go,	And with hym dwelle unto my lyves ende.
And with him dwell unto my life's end.	"Ther I was fostred of a child ful smal,
"Where I was fostered as a child full small,	Til I be deed my lyf ther wol I lede,
Until I be dead I will lead my life there,	A wydwe clene in body, herte, and al.
A widow clean in body, heart, and all.	For sith I yaf to yow my maydenhede,
For since I gave to you my maidenhead,	And am youre trewe wyf, it is no drede,
And am your true wife, there is no doubt,	God shilde swich a lordes wyf to take
God forbid such a lord's wife to take	Another man to housbonde or to make!
Another man as husband or as mate!	"And of youre newe wyf God of his grace
"And of your new wife God of his grace	So graunte yow wele and prosperitee!
Grant you happiness and prosperity!	For I wol gladly yelden hire my place,
For I will gladly yield her my place,	In which that I was blisful wont to bee.
In which I was accustomed to be blissful.	For sith it liketh yow, my lord," quod shee,
For since it pleases you, my lord," said she,	"That whilom weren al myn hertes reste,
"Who once was all my heart's peace,	That I shal goon, I wol goon whan yow leste.
That I shall go, I will go when you please.	"But ther as ye me profre swich dowaire
"But inasmuch as you offer me such dowry	As I first broghte, it is wel in my mynde
As I first brought, it is well in my mind	It were my wrecched clothes, nothyng faire,
It was my wretched clothing, in no way fair,	The whiche to me were hard now for to fynde.
Which to me were hard to find now.	O goode God! How gentil and how kynde
O good God! How gentle and how kind	Ye semed by youre speche and youre visage
You seemed by your speech and your visage	The day that maked was oure mariage!
The day that our marriage was made!	"But sooth is seyd -- algate I fynde it trewe,
"But sooth is said -- always I find it true,	For in effect it preeved is on me --
For in fact it is proven by me --	Love is noght oold as whan that it is newe.
When love is old it is not the same as when it was new.	But certes, lord, for noon adversitee,
But certainly, lord, for no adversity,	To dyen in the cas, it shal nat bee
Even if I were to die miserably, it shall not be	That evere in word or werk I shal repente
That ever in word or deed I shall repent	That I yow yaf myn herte in hool entente.
That I gave you my heart whole heartedly.	"My lord, ye woot that in my fadres place
"My lord, you know that in my father's place	Ye dide me streepe out of my povre weede,
You had me stripped out of my poor clothing,	And richely me cladden, of youre grace.
And had me richly clad, by your grace.	To yow broghte I noght elles, out of drede,
To you I brought nothing else, beyond doubt,	But feith, and nakednesse, and maydenhede;
But faith, and nakedness, and maidenhead;	And heere agayn your clothyng I restoore,
And here in return your clothing I restore,	And eek your weddyng ryng, for everemore.
And also your wedding ring, for evermore.	"The remenant of youre jueles redy be
"The remnant of your jewels ready are	Inwith youre chambre, dar I saufly sayn.
Within your chamber, dare I confidently say.	Naked out of my fadres hous," quod she,
Naked out of my father's house," said she,	"I cam, and naked moot I turne agayn.
"I came, and naked must I return.	Al youre plesance wol I folwen fayn;
All your pleasure will I eagerly follow;	But yet I hope it be nat youre entente
But yet I hope it be not your intention	That I smoklees out of youre paleys wente.
That I should go without a smock out of your palace.	"Ye koude nat doon so dishonest a thyng,
"You could not do so shameful a thing,	That thilke wombe in which youre children leye
That that same womb in which your children lay	Sholde biforn the peple, in my walkyng,
Should before the people, in my walking,	Be seyn al bare; wherfore I yow preye,
Be seen all bare; therefore I you pray,	Lat me nat lyk a worm go by the weye.
Let me not like a worm go by the way.	Remembre yow, myn owene lord so deere,
Remember, my own lord so dear,	I was youre wyf, though I unworthy weere.
I was your wife, though I unworthy were.	"Wherfore, in gerdon of my maydenhede,
"Therefore, in recompense for my maidenhead,	Which that I broghte, and noght agayn I bere,
Which I brought, and nothing I bear back,	As voucheth sauf to yeve me, to my meede,
Condescend to give me, as my recompense,	But swich a smok as I was wont to were,
Only such a smock as I was accustomed to wear,	That I therwith may wrye the wombe of here
That I with it may cover the womb of her	That was youre wyf. And heer take I my leeve
Who was your wife. And here take I my leave	Of yow, myn owene lord, lest I yow greve."
Of you, my own lord, lest I you grieve."	"The smok," quod he, "that thou hast on thy bak,
"The smock," said he, "that thou hast on thy back,	Lat it be stille, and bere it forth with thee."
Let it be (there) still, and bear it forth with thee."	But wel unnethes thilke word he spak,
But scarcely that same word he spoke,	But wente his wey, for routhe and for pitee.
But went his way, for grief and for pity.	Biforn the folk hirselven strepeth she,
Before the folk she strips herself,	And in hir smok, with heed and foot al bare,
And in her smock, with head and foot all bare,	Toward hir fadre hous forth is she fare.
Toward her father's house forth is she gone.	The folk hire folwe, wepynge in hir weye,
The folk follow her, weeping on their way,	And Fortune ay they cursen as they goon;
And Fortune ever they curse as they go;	But she fro wepyng kepte hire eyen dreye,
But she from weeping kept her eyes dry,	Ne in this tyme word ne spak she noon.
And in this time no word she spoke.	Hir fader, that this tidynge herde anoon,
Her father, who heard this news straightway,	Curseth the day and tyme that Nature
Curses the day and time that Nature	Shoop hym to been a lyves creature.
Shaped him to be a living creature.	For out of doute this olde poure man
For doubtless this old poor man	Was evere in suspect of hir mariage;
Was ever in suspicion of her marriage;	For evere he demed, sith that it bigan,
For ever he believed, since it began,	That whan the lord fulfild hadde his corage,
That when the lord had fulfilled his desires,	Hym wolde thynke it were a disparage
He would think it was a degradation	To his estaat so lowe for t'alighte,
To his rank so low to stoop,	And voyden hire as soone as ever he myghte.
And get rid of her as soon as ever he could.	Agayns his doghter hastily goth he,
To meet his daughter hastily goes he,	For he by noyse of folk knew hire comynge,
For he by noise of folk knew her coming,	And with hire olde coote, as it myghte be
And with her old coat, insofar as it could	He covered hire, ful sorwefully wepynge.
He covered her, full sorrowfully weeping.	But on hire body myghte he it nat brynge,
But on her body he could not bring it,	For rude was the clooth, and moore of age
For coarse was the cloth, and more of age	By dayes fele than at hire mariage.
By many days than at her marriage.	Thus with hire fader for a certeyn space
Thus with her father for a certain space of time	Dwelleth this flour of wyfly pacience,
Dwells this flower of womanly patience,	That neither by hire wordes ne hire face,
That neither by her words nor her face,	Biforn the folk, ne eek in hire absence,
Before the folk, nor also in their absence,	Ne shewed she that hire was doon offence;
She showed that to her was done offence;	Ne of hire heighe estaat no remembraunce
Nor of her high estate no remembrance	Ne hadde she, as by hire contenaunce.
Had she, according to her countenance.	No wonder is, for in hire grete estaat
No wonder is, for in her great estate	Hire goost was evere in pleyn humylitee;
Her spirit was ever in full humility;	No tendre mouth, noon herte delicaat,
No tender mouth, no self-indulgent feelings,	No pompe, no semblant of roialtee,
No pomp, nor outward appearance of royalty,	But ful of pacient benyngnytee,
But full of patient goodness,	Discreet and pridelees, ay honurable,
Discreet and without pride, ever honorable,	And to hire housbonde evere meke and stable.
And to her husband ever meek and stable.	Men speke of Job, and moost for his humblesse,
Men speak of Job, and mostly for his humility,	As clerkes, whan hem list, konne wel endite,
As clerks, when they want, know well how to write,	Namely of men, but as in soothfastnesse,
Especially of men, but in truth,	Though clerkes preise wommen but a lite,
Though clerks praise women but a little,	Ther kan no man in humblesse hym acquite
There can no man in humility acquit himself	As womman kan, ne kan been half so trewe
As woman can, nor can be half so true	As wommen been, but it be falle of newe.
As women are, unless it happened recently.	Fro Boloigne is this Erl of Panyk come,
From Bologna is this Earl of Panyk come,	Of which the fame up sprang to moore and lesse,
Of which the news up sprang to high ranks and low,	And to the peples eres, alle and some,
And to the people's ears, one and all,	Was kouth eek that a newe markysesse
Was made known also that a new marchioness	He with hym broghte, in swich pompe and richesse
He brought with him, in such pomp and riches	That nevere was ther seyn with mannes ye
That never was there seen with man's eye	So noble array in al West Lumbardye.
Such a noble array in all West Lombardy.	The markys, which that shoop and knew al this,
The marquis, who arranged and knew all this,	Er that this erl was come, sente his message
Before this earl was come, sent his messenger	For thilke sely povre Grisildis;
For that same innocent poor Griselda;	And she with humble herte and glad visage,
And she with humble heart and glad visage,	Nat with no swollen thoght in hire corage,
Not with any proud thought in her heart,	Cam at his heste, and on hire knees hire sette,
Came at his command, and on her knees set herself,	And reverently and wisely she hym grette.
And reverently and wisely she greeted him.	"Grisilde," quod he, "my wyl is outrely
"Griselda," said he, "my will is completely	This mayden, that shal wedded been to me,
That this maiden, who shall be wedded to me,	Received be to-morwe as roially
Be received to-morrow as royally	As it possible is in myn hous to be,
As it is possible in my house to be,	And eek that every wight in his degree
And also that every person, according to his rank	Have his estaat, in sittyng and servyse
Have his due respect, in seating and service	And heigh plesaunce, as I kan best devyse.
And great pleasure, as I can best arrange.	"I have no wommen suffisaunt, certayn,
"I have no women capable, certainly,	The chambres for t'arraye in ordinaunce
The chambers to put in order	After my lust, and therfore wolde I fayn
According to my wishes, and therefore I would like	That thyn were al swich manere governaunce.
That thine be the supervision of all this business.	Thou knowest eek of old al my plesaunce;
Thou knowest also of old all my desires;	Thogh thyn array be badde and yvel biseye,
Though thy dress be bad and in poor condition,	Do thou thy devoir at the leeste weye."
Do thou thy duty at least."	"Nat oonly, lord, that I am glad," quod she,
"Not only, lord, I am glad," said she,	"To doon youre lust, but I desire also
"To do your wishes, but I desire also	Yow for to serve and plese in my degree
You to serve and please in accord with my rank	Withouten feyntyng, and shal everemo;
Without weakening, and shall evermore;	Ne nevere, for no wele ne no wo,
Nor never, for any happiness nor any woe,	Ne shal the goost withinne myn herte stente
Shall the spirit within my heart cease	To love yow best with al my trewe entente."
To love you best with all my true will."	And with that word she gan the hous to dighte,
And with that word she began to prepare the house,	And tables for to sette, and beddes make;
And to set tables, and make beds;	And peyned hire to doon al that she myghte,
And took pains to do all that she could,	Preyynge the chambereres, for Goddes sake,
Praying the chambermaids, for God's sake,	To hasten hem, and faste swepe and shake;
To hasten themselves, and fast sweep and dust;	And she, the mooste servysable of alle,
And she, the most willing to serve of all,	Hath every chambre arrayed and his halle.
Has every chamber prepared and his hall.	Abouten undren gan this erl alighte,
About mid-morning did this earl alight,	That with hym broghte thise noble children tweye,
Who with him brought these noble children two,	For which the peple ran to seen the sighte
For which the people ran to see the sight	Of hire array, so richely biseye;
Of their accoutrements, so rich in appearance;	And thanne at erst amonges hem they seye
And then for the first time amongst themselves they say	That Walter was no fool, thogh that hym leste
That Walter was no fool, though he desired	To chaunge his wyf, for it was for the beste.
To change his wife, for it was for the best.	For she is fairer, as they deemen alle,
For she is fairer, as they all decide,	Than is Grisilde, and moore tendre of age,
Than is Griselda, and more tender of age,	And fairer fruyt bitwene hem sholde falle,
And fairer fruit between them should fall,	And moore plesant, for hire heigh lynage.
And more pleasing, because of her high lineage.	Hir brother eek so fair was of visage
Her brother also so fair was of visage	That hem to seen the peple hath caught plesaunce,
That the people take pleasure in seeing them,	Commendynge now the markys governaunce.
Commending now the marquis's governance.	"O stormy peple! Unsad and evere untrewe!
"O stormy people! Inconstant and ever untrue!	Ay undiscreet and chaungynge as a fane!
Ever undiscerning and changing like a weather vane!	Delitynge evere in rumbul that is newe,
Delighting ever in rumor that is new,	For lyk the moone ay wexe ye and wane!
For like the moon ever you wax and wane!	Ay ful of clappyng, deere ynogh a jane!
Always full of chattering, not worth a penny!	Youre doom is fals, youre constance yvele preeveth;
Your judgment is false, your constancy proves evil;	A ful greet fool is he that on yow leeveth."
A full great fool is he that believes in you."	Thus seyden sadde folk in that citee,
Thus said serious folk in that city,	Whan that the peple gazed up and doun,
When the people gazed up and down,	For they were glad, right for the noveltee,
For they were glad, right for the novelty,	To han a newe lady of hir toun.
To have a new lady of their town.	Namoore of this make I now mencioun,
No more of this make I now mention,	But to Grisilde agayn wol I me dresse,
But to Griselda again will I address myself,	And telle hir constance and hir bisynesse.
And tell her constancy and her diligence.	Ful bisy was Grisilde in every thyng
Full busy was Griselda in every thing	That to the feeste was apertinent.
That was pertaining to the feast.	Right noght was she abayst of hire clothyng,
Not at all was she ashamed of her clothing,	Thogh it were rude and somdeel eek torent;
Though it was crude and also somewhat ragged;	But with glad cheere to the yate is went
But with glad manner to the gate is went	With oother folk to greete the markysesse,
With other folk to greet the marchioness,	And after that dooth forth hire bisynesse.
And after that carries on her work.	With so glad chiere his gestes she receyveth,
With such glad manner his guests she receives,	And so konnyngly, everich in his degree,
And so skillfully, each according to his rank,	That no defaute no man aperceyveth,
That no man perceives any fault,	But ay they wondren what she myghte bee
But ever they wonder who she might be	That in so povre array was for to see,
That in such poor array was to be seen,	And koude swich honour and reverence,
And knew how to do such honor and reverence,	And worthily they preisen hire prudence.
And deservedly they praise her prudence.	In al this meene while she ne stente
In all this mean while she did not cease	This mayde and eek hir brother to commende
This maid and also her brother to commend	With al hir herte, in ful benyngne entente,
With all her heart, in full benign intention,	So wel that no man koude hir pris amende.
So well that no man could praise her more highly.	But atte laste, whan that thise lordes wende
But at the last, when these lords went	To sitten doun to mete, he gan to calle
To sit down to dinner, he called	Grisilde, as she was bisy in his halle.
Griselda, as she was busy in his hall.	"Grisilde," quod he, as it were in his pley,
"Griselda," said he, as if it were a joke,	"How liketh thee my wyf and hire beautee?"
"How do you like my wife and her beauty?"	"Right wel," quod she, "my lord; for, in good fey,
"Right well," said she, "my lord; for, in good faith,	A fairer saugh I nevere noon than she.
I never saw so fair a one as she.	I prey to God yeve hire prosperitee;
I pray to God to give her prosperity;	And so hope I that he wol to yow sende
And so I hope that he will to you send	Plesance ynogh unto youre lyves ende.
Pleasure enough unto your lives' end.	"O thyng biseke I yow, and warne also,
"One thing I beseech you, and warn also,	That ye ne prikke with no tormentynge
That you not distress with any tormenting	This tendre mayden, as ye han doon mo;
This tender maiden, as you have done to others;	For she is fostred in hire norissynge
For she has been reared in her nurture	Moore tendrely, and, to my supposynge,
More tenderly, and, as I believe,	She koude nat adversitee endure
She could not endure adversity	As koude a povre fostred creature."
As could a poorly reared creature."	And whan this Walter saugh hire pacience,
And when this Walter saw her patience,	Hir glade chiere, and no malice at al,
Her glad expression, and no malice at all,	And he so ofte had doon to hire offence,
And he so often had done to her offence,	And she ay sad and constant as a wal,
And she ever steadfast and constant as a wall,	Continuynge evere hire innocence overal,
Continuing ever her innocence in every way,	This sturdy markys gan his herte dresse
This stern marquis inclined his heart	To rewen upon hire wyfly stedfastnesse.
To have pity upon her womanly steadfastness.	"This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he;
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he;	"Be now namoore agast ne yvele apayed.
"Be now no more frightened nor displeased.	I have thy feith and thy benyngnytee,
I have thy faith and thy goodness,	As wel as evere womman was, assayed,
As well as ever woman was, tested,	In greet estaat and povreliche arrayed.
In great estate and in poverty.	Now knowe I, dere wyf, thy stedfastnesse" --
Now I know, dear wife, thy steadfastness" --	And hire in armes took and gan hire kesse.
And took her in arms and kissed her.	And she for wonder took of it no keep;
And she for amazement took of it no notice;	She herde nat what thyng he to hire seyde;
She heard not what thing he said to her;	She ferde as she had stert out of a sleep,
She fared as if she had suddenly awakened out of a sleep,	Til she out of hire mazednesse abreyde.
Until out of her bewilderment she suddenly awoke.	"Grisilde," quod he, "by God, that for us deyde,
"Griselda," said he, "by God, who for us died,	Thou art my wyf, ne noon oother I have,
Thou art my wife, and none other I have,	Ne nevere hadde, as God my soule save!
Nor ever had, as God my soul may save!	"This is thy doghter, which thou hast supposed
"This is thy daughter, which thou hast supposed	To be my wyf; that oother feithfully
To be my wife; that other truly	Shal be myn heir, as I have ay disposed;
Shall be my heir, as I have ever intended;	Thou bare hym in thy body trewely.
Thou bore him in thy body truly.	At Boloigne have I kept hem prively;
At Bologna I have kept them secretly;	Taak hem agayn, for now maystow nat seye
Take them back, for now mayst thou not say	That thou hast lorn noon of thy children tweye.
That thou hast lost any of thy children two.	"And folk that ootherweys han seyd of me,
"And folk that otherwise have said of me,	I warne hem wel that I have doon this deede
I declare to them clearly that I have done this deed	For no malice, ne for no crueltee,
For no malice, nor for no cruelty,	But for t'assaye in thee thy wommanheede,
But to test in thee thy womanhood,	And nat to sleen my children -- God forbeede! --
And not to slay my children -- God forbid! --	But for to kepe hem pryvely and stille,
But to keep them secretly and quietly,	Til I thy purpos knewe and al thy wille."
Until I knew thy perseverence and all thy will."	Whan she this herde, aswowne doun she falleth
When she heard this, down she falls in a swoon	For pitous joye, and after hire swownynge
For pitiful joy, and after her swooning	She bothe hire yonge children to hire calleth,
She calls both her young children to her,	And in hire armes, pitously wepynge,
And in her arms, pitifully weeping,	Embraceth hem, and tendrely kissynge
Embraces them, and tenderly kissing	Ful lyk a mooder, with hire salte teeres
Full like a mother, with her salt tears	She bathed bothe hire visage and hire heeres.
She bathed both their visage and their hair.	O which a pitous thyng it was to se
O what a pathetic thing it was to see	Hir swownyng, and hire humble voys to heere!
Her swooning, and her humble voice to hear!	"Grauntmercy, lord, God thanke it yow," quod she,
"Great thanks, lord, may God repay it to you," said she,	"That ye han saved me my children deere!
"That you have saved for me my children dear!	Now rekke I nevere to been deed right heere;
Now care I never to be dead right here;	Sith I stonde in youre love and in youre grace,
Since I stand in your love and in your grace,	No fors of deeth, ne whan my spirit pace!
Death does not matter, nor when my spirit may pass (away)!	"O tendre, o deere, o yonge children myne!
"O tender, o dear, o my young children!	Youre woful mooder wende stedfastly
Your woeful mother truly believed	That crueel houndes or som foul vermyne
That cruel hounds or some foul animal pests	Hadde eten yow; but God of his mercy
Had eaten you; but God of his mercy	And youre benyngne fader tendrely
And your benign father tenderly	Hath doon yow kept" -- and in that same stounde
Has had you protected" -- and in that same moment	Al sodeynly she swapte adoun to grounde.
All suddenly she fell down to the ground.	And in hire swough so sadly holdeth she
And in her swoon so tightly holds she	Hire children two, whan she gan hem t'embrace,
Her children two, when she embraced them,	That with greet sleighte and greet difficultee
That with great effort and great difficulty	The children from hire arm they gonne arace.
The children from her arm they did tear away.	O many a teere on many a pitous face
O many a tear on many a pitiful face	Doun ran of hem that stooden hire bisyde;
Down ran of them that stood beside her;	Unnethe abouten hire myghte they abyde.
Hardly about her might they remain.	Walter hire gladeth and hire sorwe slaketh;
Walter comforts her and her sorrow relieves;	She riseth up, abaysed, from hire traunce,
She rises up, disconcerted, from her trance,	And every wight hire joye and feeste maketh
And every person makes joy and festivity for her	Til she hath caught agayn hire contenaunce.
Until she has regained her composure.	Walter hire dooth so feithfully plesaunce
Walter strives so faithfully to please her	That it was deyntee for to seen the cheere
That it was delightful to see the happiness	Bitwixe hem two, now they been met yfeere.
Between them two, now they are met together.	Thise ladyes, whan that they hir tyme say,
These ladies, when they see their time,	Han taken hire and into chambre gon,
Have taken her and into chamber they go,	And strepen hire out of hire rude array,
And strip her out of her crude clothing,	And in a clooth of gold that brighte shoon,
And in a cloth of gold that brightly shone,	With a coroune of many a riche stoon
With a crown of many a rich stone	Upon hire heed, they into halle hire broghte,
Upon her head, they into hall her brought,	And ther she was honured as hire oghte.
And there she was honored as she deserved.	Thus hath this pitous day a blisful ende,
Thus has this pitiful day a blissful end,	For every man and womman dooth his myght
For every man and woman does his might	This day in murthe and revel to dispende
This day in mirth and revel to spend	Til on the welkne shoon the sterres lyght.
Until in the sky shone the stars' light.	For moore solempne in every mannes syght
For more splendid in every man's sight	This feste was, and gretter of costage,
This feast was, and greater of cost,	Than was the revel of hire mariage.
Than was the revel of their marriage.	Ful many a yeer in heigh prosperitee
Full many a year in high prosperity	Lyven thise two in concord and in reste,
Live these two in peace and in quiet,	And richely his doghter maryed he
And richly his daughter married he	Unto a lord, oon of the worthieste
Unto a lord, one of the worthiest	Of al Ytaille; and thanne in pees and reste
Of all Italy; and then in peace and rest	His wyves fader in his court he kepeth,
His wife's father in his court he keeps,	Til that the soule out of his body crepeth.
Until the soul out of his body creeps.	His sone succedeth in his heritage
His son succeeds in his heritage	In reste and pees, after his fader day,
In rest and peace, after his father's day,	And fortunat was eek in mariage,
And fortunate was also in marriage,	Al putte he nat his wyf in greet assay.
Although he put not his wife in great tests.	This world is nat so strong, it is no nay,
This world is not so strong, there is no denying,	As it hath been in olde tymes yoore,
As it has been in old times long ago,	And herkneth what this auctour seith therfoore.
And listen to what this author says concerning this (tale).	This storie is seyd nat for that wyves sholde
This story is said not so that wives should	Folwen Grisilde as in humylitee,
Follow Griselda in humility,	For it were inportable, though they wolde,
For it would be intolerable, though they would (want to),	But for that every wight, in his degree,
But so that every person, in his station in life,	Sholde be constant in adversitee
Should be constant in adversity	As was Grisilde; therfore Petrak writeth
As was Griselda; therefore Petrarch writes	This storie, which with heigh stile he enditeth.
This story, which with high style he composes.	For sith a womman was so pacient
For since a woman was so patient	Unto a mortal man, wel moore us oghte
Unto a mortal man, well more we ought to	Receyven al in gree that God us sent;
Receive with a good will all that God sends us;	For greet skile is he preeve that he wroghte.
For it is very reasonable that he test what he made.	But he ne tempteth no man that he boghte,
But he tests no man that he redeemed,	As seith Seint Jame, if ye his pistel rede;
As says Saint James, if you his epistle read;	He preeveth folk al day, it is no drede,
He tests folk all the time, it is no doubt,	And suffreth us, as for oure excercise,
And permits us, for our own good	With sharpe scourges of adversitee
With sharp whips of adversity	Ful ofte to be bete in sondry wise;
Full often to be beaten in various ways;	Nat for to knowe oure wyl, for certes he,
Not to know our will, for certainly he,	Er we were born, knew al oure freletee;
Before we were born, knew all our frailty;	And for oure beste is al his governaunce.
And for our best is all his governance.	Lat us thanne lyve in vertuous suffraunce.
Let us then live in virtuous forbearance.	But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:
But one word, lords, hear before I go:	It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days	In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;
In all the town Griseldas three or two;	For if that they were put to swiche assayes,
For if they were put to such tests,	The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes
The gold of them has now been so badly debased	With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,	It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.
It would rather break in two than bend.	For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --	Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain	In heigh maistrie, and elles were it scathe --
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --	I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,	Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;	And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.
And let us stint of serious matter.	Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:
Hear my song that says in this manner:	Lenvoy de Chaucer.
Chaucer's envoy.	Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,	And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;
And both together buried in Italy;	For which I crie in open audience
For which I cry in the hearing of all	No wedded man so hardy be t'assaille
No wedded man so bold be to test	His wyves pacience in trust to fynde
His wife's patience trusting to find	Grisildis, for in certein he shal faille.
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.	O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,
O noble wives, full of great prudence,	Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,
Let no humility nail down your tongue,	Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness	To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille
To write about you a story of such marvel	As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,
As of patient and kind Griselda,	Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!	Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,	But evere answereth at the countretaille.
But ever answers in reply.	Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,
Be not fooled because of your innocence,	But sharply taak on yow the governaille.
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.	Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,	For commune profit sith it may availle.
Since it may work to the benefit of all.	Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,	Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;
Since you are strong as is a great camel;	Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.
Suffer not that men do offense to you.	And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,
And slender wives, feeble in battle,	Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;	Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.	Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,
Fear them not; do them no reverence,	For though thyn housbonde armed be in maille,
For though thy husband be armed in mail,	The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence	Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.	In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,	And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.	If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,
If thou be fair, where folk are present,	Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;	If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;	To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;
To get thee friends always work hard;	Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,	And lat hym care, and wepe, and wrynge, and waille!
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!	Bihoold the murye words of the Host
This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,	When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,	Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
Me were levere than a barel ale	I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!	My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a gentil tale for the nones,	This is a fine tale for this occasion,
As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;	For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thyng that wol nat be, lat it be stille."	But thing that will not be, let it be still."
But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:	But one word, lords, hear before I go:
It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes	It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;	In all the town Griseldas three or two;
For if that they were put to swiche assayes,	For if they were put to such tests,
The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes	The gold of them has now been so badly debased
With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,	With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.	It would rather break in two than bend.
For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --	For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --
Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene	Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
In heigh maistrie, and elles were it scathe --	In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,	I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;	Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.	And let us stint of serious matter.
Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:	Hear my song that says in this manner:
Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,	Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;	And both together buried in Italy;
For which I crie in open audience	For which I cry in the hearing of all
No wedded man so hardy be t'assaille	No wedded man so bold be to test
His wyves pacience in trust to fynde	His wife's patience trusting to find
Grisildis, for in certein he shal faille.	Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,	O noble wives, full of great prudence,
Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,	Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence	Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille	To write about you a story of such marvel
As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,	As of patient and kind Griselda,
Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!	Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,	Follow Echo, who holds no silence,
But evere answereth at the countretaille.	But ever answers in reply.
Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,	Be not fooled because of your innocence,
But sharply taak on yow the governaille.	But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,	Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
For commune profit sith it may availle.	Since it may work to the benefit of all.
Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,	You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;	Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.	Suffer not that men do offense to you.
And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,	And slender wives, feeble in battle,
Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;	Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;
Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.	Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,	Fear them not; do them no reverence,
For though thyn housbonde armed be in maille,	For though thy husband be armed in mail,
The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence	The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.	Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,	In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.	And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,	If thou be fair, where folk are present,
Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;	Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;	If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;
To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;	To get thee friends always work hard;
Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,	Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
And lat hym care, and wepe, and wrynge, and waille!	And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
Bihoold the murye words of the Host	Behold, the merry words of the Host.
This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,	When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,
Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,	Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,
Me were levere than a barel ale	I would rather than have a barrel of ale
My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!	My wife at home had heard this legend once!
This is a gentil tale for the nones,	This is a fine tale for this occasion,
As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;	For my purposes, if you knew my will;
But thyng that wol nat be, lat it be stille."	But thing that will not be, let it be still."
The Prologue of the Nonnes Preestes Tale.	The Prologue of the Nuns and Priests Tale.
"Hoo!" quod the Knyght, "good sire, namoore of this!	"Whoa!" said the Knight, "good sire, no more of this!
That ye han seyd is right ynough, ywis,	What you have said is quite enough, indeed,
And muchel moore; for litel hevynesse	And much more; for a little sadness
Is right ynough to muche folk, I gesse.	Is quite enough for many people, I guess.
I seye for me, it is a greet disese,	I say for myself, it is a great distress,
Whereas men han been in greet welthe and ese,	When men have been in great wealth and ease,
To heeren of hire sodeyn fal, allas!	To hear of their sudden fall, alas!
And the contrarie is joye and greet solas,	And the contrary is joy and great comfort,
As whan a man hath been in povre estaat,	As when a man has been in a poor condition,
And clymbeth up and wexeth fortunat,	And climbs up and becomes fortunate,
And there abideth in prosperitee.	And there remains in prosperity.
Swich thyng is gladsom, as it thynketh me,	Such a thing is pleasing, as it seems to me,
And of swich thyng were goodly for to telle."	And of such a thing it would be good to tell."
"Ye," quod oure Hooste, "by Seint Poules belle!	"Yea," said our Host, "by Saint Paul's bell!
Ye seye right sooth; this Monk he clappeth lowde.	You say the very truth; this Monk he chatters noisily.
He spak how Fortune covered with a clowde	He spoke of how Fortune covered with a cloud
I noot nevere what; and als of a tragedie	I know not what; and also of a tragedy
Right now ye herde, and pardee, no remedie	Just now you heard, and by God, no remedy
It is for to biwaille ne compleyne	Is it to bewail or lament
That that is doon, and als it is a peyne,	That which is done, and also it is a pain,
As ye han seyd, to heere of hevynesse.	As you have said, to hear of sadness.
"Sire Monk, namoore of this, so God yow blesse!	"Sir Monk, no more of this, as God may you bless!
Youre tale anoyeth al this compaignye.	Your tale annoys all this company.
Swich talkyng is nat worth a boterflye,	Such talking is not worth a butterfly,
For therinne is ther no desport ne game.	For in it there is no pleasure nor amusement.
Wherfore, sire Monk, daun Piers by youre name,	Therefore, Sir Monk, dan Piers by your name,
I pray yow hertely telle us somwhat elles;	I pray yow earnestly tell us something else;
For sikerly, nere clynkyng of youre belles	For truly, were it not for the clinking of your bells
That on youre bridel hange on every syde,	That on your bridle hang on every side,
By hevene kyng that for us alle dyde,	By heaven's King who for us all died,
I sholde er this han fallen doun for sleep,	I should before this have fallen down because of sleepiness,
Althogh the slough had never been so deep;	Although the mud had never been so deep;
Thanne hadde your tale al be toold in veyn.	Then had your tale been told all in vain.
For certeinly, as that thise clerkes seyn,	For certainly, as these clerks say,
Whereas a man may have noon audience,	Where a man may have no hearers,
Noght helpeth it to tellen his sentence.	It is no use to tell his opinion.
"And wel I woot the substance is in me,	"And well I know the capacity of appreciation is in me,
If any thyng shal wel reported be.	If any thing shall be well told.
Sir, sey somwhat of huntyng, I yow preye."	Sir, say something about hunting, I you pray."
"Nay," quod this Monk, "I have no lust to pleye.	"Nay," said this Monk, "I have no desire to play.
Now lat another telle, as I have toold."	Now let another tell, as I have told."
Thanne spak oure Hoost with rude speche and boold,	Then spoke oure Host with rude speech and bold,
And seyde unto the Nonnes Preest anon,	And said unto the Nun's Priest straightway,
"Com neer, thou preest, com hyder, thou sir John!	"Come near, thou priest, come hither, thou sir John!
Telle us swich thyng as may oure hertes glade.	Tell us such thing as may our hearts gladden.
Be blithe, though thou ryde upon a jade.	Be happy, though thou ride upon a nag.
What thogh thyn hors be bothe foul and lene?	What if thy horse be both poor and lean?
If he wol serve thee, rekke nat a bene.	If he will serve thee, care not a bean.
Looke that thyn herte be murie everemo."	See that thy heart be merry evermore."
"Yis, sir," quod he, "yis, Hoost, so moot I go,	"Yes indeed, sir," said he, "yes indeed, Host, as I may I prosper,
But I be myrie, ywis I wol be blamed."	Unless I be merry, indeed I will be blamed."
And right anon his tale he hath attamed,	And right away his tale he has begun,
And thus he seyde unto us everichon,	And thus he said unto us every one,
This sweete preest, this goodly man sir John.	This sweet priest, this goodly man sir John.
A povre wydwe, somdeel stape in age,	A poor widow, somewhat advanced in age,
Was whilom dwellyng in a narwe cotage,	Was once dwelling in a small cottage,
Biside a grove, stondynge in a dale.	Beside a grove, standing in a dale.
This wydwe, of which I telle yow my tale,	This widow, of whom I tell you my tale,
Syn thilke day that she was last a wyf	Since that same day that she was last a wife
In pacience ladde a ful symple lyf,	In patience led a very simple life,
For litel was hir catel and hir rente.	For little was her possessions and her income.
By housbondrie of swich as God hire sente	By husbandry of such as God sent her
She foond hirself and eek hir doghtren two.	She provided for herself and also her two daughters.
Thre large sowes hadde she, and namo,	She had three large sows, and no more,
Three keen, and eek a sheep that highte Malle.	Three cows, and also a sheep that is called Malle.
Ful sooty was hire bour and eek hir halle,	Full sooty was her bedchamber and also her hall,
In which she eet ful many a sklendre meel.	In which she ate very many a scanty meal.
Of poynaunt sauce hir neded never a deel.	She needed not a bit of spicy sauce.
No deyntee morsel passed thurgh hir throte;	No dainty morsel passed through her throat;
Hir diete was accordant to hir cote.	Her diet was such as her farm produced.
Repleccioun ne made hire nevere sik;	Overeating never made her sick;
Attempree diete was al hir phisik,	Moderate diet was all her medical treatment,
And exercise, and hertes suffisaunce.	And exercise, and a contented heart.
The goute lette hire nothyng for to daunce,	The gout not at all prevented her from dancing,
N' apoplexie shente nat hir heed.	And apoplexy harmed not her head.
No wyn ne drank she, neither whit ne reed;	No wine she drank, neither white nor red;
Hir bord was served moost with whit and blak --	Her board was provided mostly with white and black --
Milk and broun breed, in which she foond no lak,	Milk and dark bread, in which she found no lack,
Seynd bacoun, and somtyme an ey or tweye,	Broiled bacon, and sometimes an egg or two,
For she was, as it were, a maner deye.	For she was, as it were, a sort of dairywoman.
A yeerd she hadde, enclosed al aboute	She had a yard, enclosed all around
With stikkes, and a drye dych withoute,	With sticks, and a dry ditch outside it,
In which she hadde a cok, hight Chauntecleer.	In which she had a cock, called Chauntecleer.
In al the land, of crowyng nas his peer.	In all the land, there was not his peer in crowing.
His voys was murier than the murie orgon	His voice was merrier than the merry organ
On messe-dayes that in the chirche gon.	That goes in the church on mass-days.
Wel sikerer was his crowyng in his logge	Well more accurate was his crowing in his lodge
Than is a clokke or an abbey orlogge.	Than is a clock or an abbey timepiece.
By nature he knew ech ascencioun	By nature he knew (the hour of) each ascension
Of the equynoxial in thilke toun;	Of the celestial equator in that same town;
For whan degrees fiftene weren ascended,	For when degrees fifteen were ascended,
Thanne crew he that it myghte nat been amended.	Then he crowed so that it could not be improved.
His coomb was redder than the fyn coral,	His comb was redder than the fine coral,
And batailled as it were a castel wal;	And notched with battlements as if it were a castle wall;
His byle was blak, and as the jeet it shoon;	His bill was black, and it shone like the jet stone;
Lyk asure were his legges and his toon;	Like azure were his legs and his toes;
His nayles whitter than the lylye flour,	His nails whiter than the lily flour,
And lyk the burned gold was his colour.	And like the burnished gold was his color.
This gentil cok hadde in his governaunce	This gentle cock had in his governance
Sevene hennes for to doon al his plesaunce,	Seven hens to do all his pleasure,
Whiche were his sustres and his paramours,	Which were his sisters and his concubines,
And wonder lyk to hym, as of colours;	And wonderfully like him, in their colors;
Of whiche the faireste hewed on hir throte	Of which the fairest colored on her throat
Was cleped faire damoysele Pertelote.	Was called fair demoiselle Pertelote.
Curteys she was, discreet, and debonaire,	Courteous she was, discreet, and gracious,
And compaignable, and bar hyrself so faire	And companionable, and bore herself so fair
Syn thilke day that she was seven nyght oold	Since that same day that she was seven nights old
That trewely she hath the herte in hoold	That truly she has in possession the heart
Of Chauntecleer, loken in every lith;	Of Chauntecleer, locked in every limb (completely);
He loved hire so that wel was hym therwith.	He loved her so that well was him because of that.
But swich a joye was it to here hem synge,	But such a joy it was to hear them sing,
Whan that the brighte sonne gan to sprynge,	When the bright sun began to spring,
In sweete accord, "My lief is faren in londe!" --	In sweet accord, "My love has gone to the country!" --
For thilke tyme, as I have understonde,	For in that same time, as I have understood,
Beestes and briddes koude speke and synge.	Beasts and birds could speak and sing.
And so bifel that in a dawenynge,	And so befell that in a dawning,
As Chauntecleer among his wyves alle	As Chauntecleer among all his wives
Sat on his perche, that was in the halle,	Sat on his perch, that was in the hall,
And next hym sat this faire Pertelote,	And next to him sat this faire Pertelote,
This Chauntecleer gan gronen in his throte,	This Chauntecleer began to groan in his throat,
As man that in his dreem is drecched soore.	As one that in his dream is deeply troubled.
And whan that Pertelote thus herde hym roore,	And when Pertelote thus heard him roar,
She was agast and seyde, "Herte deere,	She was aghast and said, "Dear heart,
What eyleth yow, to grone in this manere?	What ails you, to groan in this manner?
Ye been a verray sleper; fy, for shame!"	You are a true (sound) sleeper; fie, for shame!"
And he answerde, and seyde thus: "Madame,	And he answered, and said thus: "Madame,
I pray yow that ye take it nat agrief.	I pray you that you take it not amiss.
By God, me mette I was in swich meschief	By God, I dreamed I was in such mischief
Right now that yet myn herte is soore afright.	Right now that yet my heart is grievously frightened.
Now God," quod he, "my swevene recche aright,	Now God," said he, "interpret my dream correctly,
And kepe my body out of foul prisoun!	And keep my body out of foul prison!
Me mette how that I romed up and doun	I dreamed how I roamed up and down
Withinne our yeerd, wheer as I saugh a beest	Within our yard, where I saw a beast
Was lyk an hound, and wolde han maad areest	Was like a hound, and would have seized
Upon my body, and wolde han had me deed.	Upon my body, and would have had me dead.
His colour was bitwixe yelow and reed,	His color was between yellow and red,
And tipped was his tayl and bothe his eeris	And tipped was his tail and both his ears
With blak, unlyk the remenant of his heeris;	With black, unlike the rest of his hair;
His snowte smal, with glowynge eyen tweye.	His snout small, with two glowing eyes.
Yet of his look for feere almoost I deye;	Yet for fear of his look I almost die;
This caused me my gronyng, doutelees."	This caused my groaning, doubtless."
"Avoy!" quod she, "fy on yow, hertelees!	"Shame!" said she, "fie on you, coward!
Allas," quod she, "for, by that God above,	Alas," said she, "for, by that God above,
Now han ye lost myn herte and al my love!	Now have you lost my heart and all my love!
I kan nat love a coward, by my feith!	I can not love a coward, by my faith!
For certes, what so any womman seith,	For certainly, whatever any woman says,
We alle desiren, if it myghte bee,	We all desire, if it might be,
To han housbondes hardy, wise, and free,	To have husbands hardy, wise, and generous,
And secree -- and no nygard, ne no fool,	And secret -- and no miser, nor no fool,
Ne hym that is agast of every tool,	Nor him who is afraid of every weapon,
Ne noon avauntour, by that God above!	Nor any boaster, by that God above!
How dorste ye seyn, for shame, unto youre love	How dare you say, for shame, unto your love
That any thyng myghte make yow aferd?	That any thing might make you afraid?
Have ye no mannes herte, and han a berd?	Have you no man's heart, and have a beard?
Allas! And konne ye been agast of swevenys?	Alas! And can you be frightened of dreams?
Nothyng, God woot, but vanitee in sweven is.	Nothing, God knows, but foolishness is in dreams.
Swevenes engendren of replecciouns,	Dreams are produced by overeating,
And ofte of fume and of complecciouns,	And often by stomach vapors and by the mixture of bodily humors,
Whan humours been to habundant in a wight.	When humors are too abundant in a person.
Certes this dreem, which ye han met to-nyght,	Certainly this dream, which you have dreamed to-night,
Cometh of the greete superfluytee	Comes of the great superfluity
Of youre rede colera, pardee,	Of your red choleric humor, indeed,
Which causeth folk to dreden in hir dremes	Which causes folk in their dreams to be afraid
Of arwes, and of fyr with rede lemes,	Of arrows, and of fire with red flames,
Of rede beestes, that they wol hem byte,	Of red beasts, (fearing) that they will bite them,
Of contek, and of whelpes, grete and lyte;	Of strife, and of dogs, big and little;
Right as the humour of malencolie	Right as the humor of melancholy
Causeth ful many a man in sleep to crie	Causes very many a man in sleep to cry
For feere of blake beres, or boles blake,	For fear of black bears, or black bulls,
Or elles blake develes wole hem take.	Or else black devils will take them.
Of othere humours koude I telle also	Of other humors could I tell also
That werken many a man sleep ful wo;	That cause many a man much woe (in) sleep;
But I wol passe as lightly as I kan.	But I will pass over as lightly as I can.
"Lo Catoun, which that was so wys a man,	"Lo Cato, who was so wise a man,
Seyde he nat thus, `Ne do no fors of dremes'?	Said he not thus, `Attach no importance to dreams'?
"Now sire," quod she, "whan we flee fro the bemes,	"Now sir," said she, "when we fly from the beams,
For Goddes love, as taak som laxatyf.	For God's love, take some laxative.
Up peril of my soule and of my lyf,	Upon peril of my soul and of my life,
I conseille yow the beste -- I wol nat lye --	I counsel you the best -- I will not lie --
That bothe of colere and of malencolye	That both of choler and of melancholy
Ye purge yow; and for ye shal nat tarie,	You purge yourself; and so that you shall not delay,
Though in this toun is noon apothecarie,	Though in this town is no apothecary,
I shal myself to herbes techen yow	I shall myself guide you to herbs
That shul been for youre hele and for youre prow;	That shall be for your health and for your benefit;
And in oure yeerd tho herbes shal I fynde	And in our yard I shall find those herbs
The whiche han of hire propretee by kynde	The which by nature have the power
To purge yow bynethe and eek above.	To purge you beneath and also above.
Foryet nat this, for Goddes owene love!	Forget not this, for God's own love!
Ye been ful coleryk of compleccioun;	You are dominated by the choleric humor;
Ware the sonne in his ascencioun	Beware the sun when it is high in the sky
Ne fynde yow nat repleet of humours hoote.	And do not find yourself with an excess of hot humors.
And if it do, I dar wel leye a grote,	And if there be an excess, I dare well bet four pence,
That ye shul have a fevere terciane,	That you shall have a fever recurring every three days,
Or an agu that may be youre bane.	Or an ague that may be your death.
A day or two ye shul have digestyves	A day or two you shall have digestives
Of wormes, er ye take youre laxatyves	Of worms, before you take your laxatives
Of lawriol, centaure, and fumetere,	Of spurge laurel, centaury, and fumitory,
Or elles of ellebor, that groweth there,	Or else of hellebore, that grows there,
Of katapuce, or of gaitrys beryis,	Of caper-spurge, or of rhamus,
Of herbe yve, growyng in oure yeerd, ther mery is;	Of ground ivy, growing in our yard, where it is pleasant;
Pekke hem up right as they growe and ete hem yn.	Peck them up right as they grow and eat them in.
Be myrie, housbonde, for youre fader kyn!	Be merry, husband, for your father's kin!
Dredeth no dreem; I kan sey yow namoore."	Dread no dream; I can say you no more."
"Madame," quod he, "graunt mercy of youre loore.	"Madame," said he, "great thanks for your learning.
But nathelees, as touchyng daun Catoun,	But nonetheless, as touching dan Cato,
That hath of wysdom swich a greet renoun,	That has of wisdom such a great renown,
Though that he bad no dremes for to drede,	Though he commanded (us) to dread no dreams,
By God, men may in olde bookes rede	By God, men may in old books read
Of many a man moore of auctorite	Of many a man of more authority
Than evere Caton was, so moot I thee,	Than Cato ever was, as I may prosper,
That al the revers seyn of this sentence,	Who say all the reverse of this sentence,
And han wel founden by experience	And have well found by experience
That dremes been significaciouns	That dreams are significations
As wel of joye as of tribulaciouns	As well of joy as of tribulations
That folk enduren in this lif present.	That folk endure in this present life.
Ther nedeth make of this noon argument;	There need be no argument about this;
The verray preeve sheweth it in dede.	The proof itself shows it in the deed.
"Oon of the gretteste auctour that men rede	"One of the greatest author that men read
Seith thus: that whilom two felawes wente	Says thus: that once two fellows went
On pilgrimage, in a ful good entente,	On pilgrimage, with a very good intention,
And happed so, they coomen in a toun	And it so happened, they came in a town
Wher as ther was swich congregacioun	Where there was such a gathering
Of peple, and eek so streit of herbergage,	Of people, and also such a scantiness of lodging,
That they ne founde as muche as o cotage	That they found not so much as one cottage
In which they bothe myghte ylogged bee.	In which they both might be lodged.
Wherfore they mosten of necessitee,	Therefore they must of necessity,
As for that nyght, departen compaignye;	For that night, part company;
And ech of hem gooth to his hostelrye,	And each of them goes to his hostelry,
And took his loggyng as it wolde falle.	And took his lodging as it would befall.
That oon of hem was logged in a stalle,	The one of them was lodged in a stall,
Fer in a yeerd, with oxen of the plough;	Far in a yard, with oxen of the plough;
That oother man was logged wel ynough,	That other man was lodged well enough,
As was his aventure or his fortune,	As was his adventure or his fortune,
That us governeth alle as in commune.	Which us governs all in common.
"And so bifel that, longe er it were day,	"And it so befell that, long before it was day,
This man mette in his bed, ther as he lay,	This man dreamed in his bed, where he lay,
How that his felawe gan upon hym calle,	How his fellow began to call upon him,
And seyde, `Allas, for in an oxes stalle	And said, `Alas, for in an oxen's stall
This nyght I shal be mordred ther I lye!	This night I shall be murdered where I lie!
Now help me, deere brother, or I dye.	Now help me, dear brother, or I die.
In alle haste com to me!' he sayde.	In all haste come to me!' he said.
This man out of his sleep for feere abrayde;	This man out of his sleep for fear awakened suddenly;
But whan that he was wakened of his sleep,	But when he was wakened of his sleep,
He turned hym and took of this no keep.	He turned himself and took no heed of this.
Hym thoughte his dreem nas but a vanitee.	He thought his dream was nothing but a fantasy.
Thus twies in his slepyng dremed hee;	Thus twice in his sleeping he dreamed;
And atte thridde tyme yet his felawe	And at third time yet his fellow
Cam, as hym thoughte, and seide, `I am now slawe.	Came, as it seemed to him, and said, `I am now slain.
Bihoold my bloody woundes depe and wyde!	Behold my bloody wounds deep and wide!
Arys up erly in the morwe tyde,	Arise up early in the morning time,
And at the west gate of the toun,' quod he,	And at the west gate of the town,' he said,
`A carte ful of dong ther shaltow se,	`A cart full of dung there shalt thou see,
In which my body is hid ful prively;	In which my body is hid very secretly;
Do thilke carte arresten boldely.	Have that same cart immediately seized.
My gold caused my mordre, sooth to sayn,'	My gold caused my murder, to say the truth,'
And tolde hym every point how he was slayn,	And told him in full detail how he was slain,
With a ful pitous face, pale of hewe.	With a very piteous face, pale of hue.
And truste wel, his dreem he foond ful trewe,	And trust well, his dream he found very true,
For on the morwe, as soone as it was day,	For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,
To his felawes in he took the way;	To his fellow's inn he took the way;
And whan that he cam to this oxes stalle,	And when he came to this oxen's stall,
After his felawe he bigan to calle.	After his fellow he began to call.
"The hostiler answerede hym anon,	"The innkeeper answered him straightway,
And seyde, `Sire, your felawe is agon.	And said, `Sir, your fellow is gone.
As soone as day he wente out of the toun.'	As soon as it was day he went out of the town.'
"This man gan fallen in suspecioun,	"This man began to fall in suspicion,
Remembrynge on his dremes that he mette,	Remembering his dreams that he dreamed,
And forth he gooth -- no lenger wolde he lette --	And forth he goes -- no longer would he delay --
Unto the west gate of the toun, and fond	Unto the west gate of the town, and found
A dong-carte, wente as it were to donge lond,	A dung-cart, which went as if it were to dung land,
That was arrayed in that same wise	That was drawn up in that same manner
As ye han herd the dede man devyse.	As you have heard the dead man tell.
And with an hardy herte he gan to crye	And with a hardy heart he began to cry for
Vengeance and justice of this felonye:	Vengeance and justice of this felony:
`My felawe mordred is this same nyght,	`My fellow is murdered this same night,
And in this carte he lith gapyng upright.	And in this cart he lies gaping upright.
I crye out on the ministres,' quod he,	I cry out on the officials,' said he,
`That sholden kepe and reulen this citee.	`Who should guard and rule this city.
Harrow! Allas! Heere lith my felawe slayn!'	Help! Alas! Here lies my fellow slain!'
What sholde I moore unto this tale sayn?	What should I more unto this tale say?
The peple out sterte and caste the cart to grounde,	The people rushed out and cast the cart to ground,
And in the myddel of the dong they founde	And in the middle of the dung they found
The dede man, that mordred was al newe.	The dead man, who was just recently murdered.
"O blisful God, that art so just and trewe,	"O blissful God, that art so just and true,
Lo, how that thou biwreyest mordre alway!	Lo, how thou always reveal murder!
Mordre wol out; that se we day by day.	Murder will out; we see that day by day.
Mordre is so wlatsom and abhomynable	Murder is so disgusting and abominable
To God, that is so just and resonable,	To God, who is so just and reasonable,
That he ne wol nat suffre it heled be,	That He will not suffer it to be hidden,
Though it abyde a yeer, or two, or thre.	Though it may wait a year, or two, or three.
Mordre wol out, this my conclusioun.	Murder will out, this is my conclusion.
And right anon, ministres of that toun	And immediately, officials of that town
Han hent the carter and so soore hym pyned,	Have seized the carter and so painfully tortured him,
And eek the hostiler so soore engyned,	And also the hosteller so grievously tortured,
That they biknewe hire wikkednesse anon,	That they straightway acknowledged their wickedness,
And were anhanged by the nekke-bon.	And were hanged by the neck-bone.
"Heere may men seen that dremes been to drede.	"Here men may seen that dreams are to be feared.
And certes in the same book I rede,	And certainly in the same book I read,
Right in the nexte chapitre after this --	Right in the next chapter after this --
I gabbe nat, so have I joye or blis --	I do not lie, as I may have joy or bliss --
Two men that wolde han passed over see,	Two men that would have passed over see,
For certeyn cause, into a fer contree,	For a certain reason, into a far country,
If that the wynd ne hadde been contrarie,	If that the wind had not been contrary,
That made hem in a citee for to tarie	That made them to tarry in a city
That stood ful myrie upon an haven-syde;	That stood very merrily upon an haven-side;
But on a day, agayn the even-tyde,	But on a day, toward the evening time,
The wynd gan chaunge, and blew right as hem leste.	The wind began to change, and blew exactly as they desired.
Jolif and glad they wente unto hir reste,	Jolly and glad they went unto their rest,
And casten hem ful erly for to saille.	And they planned to sail very early.
But herkneth! To that o man fil a greet mervaille:	But listen! To that one man befell a great marvel:
That oon of hem, in slepyng as he lay,	The one of them, in sleeping as he lay,
Hym mette a wonder dreem agayn the day.	He dreamed a wondrous dream before the day.
Hym thoughte a man stood by his beddes syde,	He thought a man stood by his bed's side,
And hym comanded that he sholde abyde,	And commanded him that he should stay,
And seyde hym thus: `If thou tomorwe wende,	And said to him thus: `If thou travel tomorrow,
Thow shalt be dreynt; my tale is at an ende.'	Thou shalt be drowned; my tale is at an end.'
He wook, and tolde his felawe what he mette,	He woke, and told his fellow what he dreamed,
And preyde hym his viage for to lette;	And prayed him to delay his voyage;
As for that day, he preyde hym to byde.	For that day, he prayed him to wait.
His felawe, that lay by his beddes syde,	His fellow, that lay by his bed's side,
Gan for to laughe, and scorned him ful faste.	Began to laugh, and vigorously scorned him.
`No dreem,' quod he, `may so myn herte agaste	`No dream,' said he, `may so frighten my heart
That I wol lette for to do my thynges.	That I will desist from doing my tasks.
I sette nat a straw by thy dremynges,	I set not a straw by (put no value on) thy dreams,
For swevenes been but vanytees and japes.	For dreams are but fantasies and foolishness.
Men dreme alday of owles and of apes,	Men dream all the time of owls and of apes,
And of many a maze therwithal;	And of many a source of amazement indeed;
Men dreme of thyng that nevere was ne shal.	Men dream of a thing that never was nor shall be.
But sith I see that thou wolt heere abyde,	But since I see that thou will remain here,
And thus forslewthen wilfully thy tyde,	And thus willfully waste thy tide,
God woot, it reweth me; and have good day!'	God knows, it makes me sorry; and have good day!'
And thus he took his leve, and wente his way.	And thus he took his leave, and went his way.
But er that he hadde half his cours yseyled,	But before he had sailed half his course,
Noot I nat why, ne what myschaunce it eyled,	I know not why, nor what mischance harmed it,
But casuelly the shippes botme rente,	But by chance the ship's bottom broke open,
And ship and man under the water wente	And ship and man went under the water
In sighte of othere shippes it bisyde,	In sight of other ships beside it,
That with hem seyled at the same tyde.	That with them sailed on the same tide.
And therfore, faire Pertelote so deere,	And therefore, faire Pertelote so dear,
By swiche ensamples olde maistow leere	By such old examples thou may learn
That no man sholde been to recchelees	That no man should be too heedless
Of dremes; for I seye thee, doutelees,	Of dreams; for I say to thee, doubtless,
That many a dreem ful soore is for to drede.	That many a dream is very greatly to be feared.
"Lo, in the lyf of Seint Kenelm I rede,	"Lo, I read in the life of Saint Kenelm,
That was Kenulphus sone, the noble kyng	That was son of Kenulphus, the noble king
Of Mercenrike, how Kenelm mette a thyng.	Of Mercia, how Kenelm dreamed a thing.
A lite er he was mordred, on a day,	A little before he was murdered, on a day,
His mordre in his avysioun he say.	He saw his murder in his vision.
His norice hym expowned every deel	His nurse completely explained to him
His sweven, and bad hym for to kepe hym weel	His dream, and ordered him to guard himself well
For traisoun; but he nas but seven yeer oold,	From treason; but he was only seven years old,
And therfore litel tale hath he toold	And therefore he put little store
Of any dreem, so hooly was his herte.	In any dream, so holy was his heart.
By God! I hadde levere than my sherte	By God! I had rather than my shirt (give my shirt)
That ye hadde rad his legende, as have I.	That you had read his legend, as have I.
"Dame Pertelote, I sey yow trewely,	"Dame Pertelote, I say you truly,
Macrobeus, that writ the avisioun	Macrobius, that wrote the vision
In Affrike of the worthy Cipioun,	In Africa of the worthy Scipio,
Affermeth dremes, and seith that they been	Affirms (the value of) dreams, and says that they are
Warnynge of thynges that men after seen.	Warnings of things that men later see (come to pass)
And forthermoore, I pray yow, looketh wel	And furthermore, I pray you, look well
In the olde testament, of Daniel,	In the Old Testament, concerning Daniel,
If he heeld dremes any vanitee.	If he held dreams (to be) any foolishness.
Reed eek of Joseph, and ther shul ye see	Read also of Joseph, and there shall you see
Wher dremes be somtyme -- I sey nat alle --	Whether dreams are sometimes -- I say not all --
Warnynge of thynges that shul after falle.	Warnings of things that shall afterward befall.
Looke of Egipte the kyng, daun Pharao,	Consider the king of Egypt, dan Pharaoh,
His bakere and his butiller also,	His baker and his butler also,
Wher they ne felte noon effect in dremes.	Whether or not they felt any effect in dreams.
Whoso wol seken actes of sondry remes	Whoever will seek out the histories of various nations
May rede of dremes many a wonder thyng.	May read many a wonderful thing about dreams.
Lo Cresus, which that was of Lyde kyng,	Lo Croesus, who was king of Lydia,
Mette he nat that he sat upon a tree,	Dreamed he not that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified he sholde anhanged bee?	Which signified he should be hanged?
Lo heere Andromacha, Ectores wyf,	Lo here Andromacha, Hector's wife,
That day that Ector sholde lese his lyf,	That day that Hector should lose his life,
She dremed on the same nyght biforn	She dreamed on the same night before
How that the lyf of Ector sholde be lorn,	How the life of Hector should be lost,
If thilke day he wente into bataille.	If that same day he went into battle.
She warned hym, but it myghte nat availle;	She warned him, but it might not avail;
He wente for to fighte natheles,	He went to fight nonetheless,
But he was slayn anon of Achilles.	But he was slain straightway by Achilles.
But thilke tale is al to longe to telle,	But that same tale is all too long to tell,
And eek it is ny day; I may nat dwelle.	And also it is nigh day; I may not delay.
Shortly I seye, as for conclusioun,	Shortly I say, as for conclusion,
That I shal han of this avisioun	That I shall have of this vision
Adversitee; and I seye forthermoor	Adversity; and I say furthermore
That I ne telle of laxatyves no stoor,	That I put no store in laxatives,
For they been venymes, I woot it weel;	For they are poisonous, I know it well;
I hem diffye, I love hem never a deel!	I renounce them, I love them not at all!
"Now let us speke of myrthe, and stynte al this.	"Now let us speak of mirth, and stop all this.
Madame Pertelote, so have I blis,	Madame Pertelote, as I may have bliss,
Of o thyng God hath sent me large grace;	Of one thing God has sent me a great favor;
For whan I se the beautee of youre face,	For when I see the beauty of your face,
Ye been so scarlet reed aboute youre yen,	You are so scarlet red about your eyes,
It maketh al my drede for to dyen;	It makes all my dread die;
For al so siker as In principio,	For as surely as `In the beginning,
Mulier est hominis confusio --	`Woman is the ruin of man --'
Madame, the sentence of this Latyn is,	Madame, the meaning of this Latin is,
`Womman is mannes joye and al his blis.'	`Woman is man's joy and all his bliss.'
For whan I feele a-nyght your softe syde --	For when I feel at night your soft side --
Al be it that I may nat on yow ryde,	Although I can not on you ride,
For that oure perche is maad so narwe, allas --	Because our perch is made so narrow, alas --
I am so ful of joye and of solas,	I am so full of joy and of pleasure,
That I diffye bothe sweven and dreem."	That I renounce both vision and dream."
And with that word he fley doun fro the beem,	And with that word he flew down from the beam,
For it was day, and eke his hennes alle,	For it was day, and also all his hens,
And with a chuk he gan hem for to calle,	And with a cluck he began to call them,
For he hadde founde a corn, lay in the yerd.	Because he had found a seed, which lay in the yard.
Real he was, he was namoore aferd.	Royal he was, he was no longer afraid.
He fethered Pertelote twenty tyme,	He embraced Pertelote twenty times,
And trad hire eke as ofte, er it was pryme.	And copulated with her also as often, before it was  a.m..
He looketh as it were a grym leoun,	He looks as if he were a grim lion,
And on his toos he rometh up and doun;	And on his toes he roams up and down;
Hym deigned nat to sette his foot to grounde.	He deigned not to set his foot to ground.
He chukketh whan he hath a corn yfounde,	He clucks when he has found a seed,
And to hym rennen thanne his wyves alle.	And then his wives all run to him.
Thus roial, as a prince is in his halle,	Thus royal, as a prince is in his hall,
Leve I this Chauntecleer in his pasture,	Leave I this Chauntecleer in his feeding place,
And after wol I telle his aventure.	And after I will tell his adventure.
Whan that the month in which the world bigan,	When the month in which the world began,
That highte March, whan God first maked man,	Which is called March, when God first made man,
Was compleet, and passed were also,	Was complete, and passed were also,
Syn March [was gon], thritty dayes and two,	Since March had gone, thirty days and two,
Bifel that Chauntecleer in al his pryde,	Befell that Chauntecleer in all his pride,
His sevene wyves walkynge by his syde,	His seven wives walking by his side,
Caste up his eyen to the brighte sonne,	Cast up his eyes to the bright sun,
That in the signe of Taurus hadde yronne	That in the sign of Taurus had run
Twenty degrees and oon, and somwhat moore,	Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more,
And knew by kynde, and by noon oother loore,	And knew by nature, and by none other knowledge,
That it was pryme, and crew with blisful stevene.	That it was prime, and crowed with blissful voice.
"The sonne," he seyde, "is clomben up on hevene	"The sun," he said, "has climbed up on heaven
Fourty degrees and oon, and moore ywis.	Forty degrees and one, and more indeed.
Madame Pertelote, my worldes blis,	Madame Pertelote, my world's bliss,
Herkneth thise blisful briddes how they synge,	Listen to these blissful birds, how they sing,
And se the fresshe floures how they sprynge;	And see the fresh flowers, how they spring;
Ful is myn herte of revel and solas!"	My heart is full of revel and pleasure!"
But sodeynly hym fil a sorweful cas,	But suddenly to him befell a sorrowful situation,
For evere the latter ende of joye is wo.	For ever the latter end of joy is woe.
God woot that worldly joye is soone ago;	God knows that worldly joy is soon gone;
And if a rethor koude faire endite,	And if a rhetorician could fairly compose,
He in a cronycle saufly myghte it write	He in a chronicle confidently could write it
As for a sovereyn notabilitee.	As a supremely important fact.
Now every wys man, lat him herkne me;	Now every wise man, let him listen to me;
This storie is also trewe, I undertake,	This story is as true, I declare,
As is the book of Launcelot de Lake,	As is the Book of Lancelot of the Lake,
That wommen holde in ful greet reverence.	Which women hold in very great reverence.
Now wol I torne agayn to my sentence.	Now will I turn again to my subject matter.
A col-fox, ful of sly iniquitee,	A fox, full of sly iniquity,
That in the grove hadde woned yeres three,	That in the grove had dwelled three years,
By heigh ymaginacioun forncast,	By exalted imagination predestined,
The same nyght thurghout the hegges brast	The same night through the hedges broke
Into the yerd ther Chauntecleer the faire	Into the yard where the handsome Chauntecleer
Was wont, and eek his wyves, to repaire;	Was accustomed, and also his wives, to repair;
And in a bed of wortes stille he lay	And in a bed of cabbages he lay quietly
Til it was passed undren of the day,	Until it had passed  a.m. of the day,
Waitynge his tyme on Chauntecleer to falle,	Waiting his time on Chauntecleer to fall,
As gladly doon thise homycides alle	As habitually do all these homicides
That in await liggen to mordre men.	That in ambush lie to murder men.
O false mordrour, lurkynge in thy den!	O false murderer, lurking in thy den!
O newe Scariot, newe Genylon,	O new Judas Iscariot, new Genylon,
False dissymulour, o Greek Synon,	False deceiver, O Greek Synon,
That broghtest Troye al outrely to sorwe!	That brought all Troy completely to sorrow!
O Chauntecleer, acursed be that morwe	O Chauntecleer, cursed be that morning
That thou into that yerd flaugh fro the bemes!	That thou flew from the beams into that yard!
Thou were ful wel ywarned by thy dremes	Thou were very well warned by thy dreams
That thilke day was perilous to thee;	That that same day was perilous to thee;
But what that God forwoot moot nedes bee,	But what God knows beforehand must by necessity be,
After the opinioun of certein clerkis.	According to the opinion of certain scholars.
Witnesse on hym that any parfit clerk is,	Take witness of him that is a thoroughly competent scholar,
That in scole is greet altercacioun	That in the university is great disagreement
In this mateere, and greet disputisoun,	In this matter, and great disputation,
And hath been of an hundred thousand men.	And has been (disputed) by a hundred thousand men.
But I ne kan nat bulte it to the bren	But I can not separate the valid and invalid arguments
As kan the hooly doctour Augustyn,	As can the holy doctor Augustine,
Or Boece, or the Bisshop Bradwardyn,	Or Boethius, or the Bishop Bradwardyn,
Wheither that Goddes worthy forwityng	Whether God's worthy foreknowledge
Streyneth me nedely for to doon a thyng --	Constrains me by need to do a thing --
"Nedely" clepe I symple necessitee --	"Need" I call simple necessity --
Or elles, if free choys be graunted me	Or else, if free choice be granted to me
To do that same thyng, or do it noght,	To do that same thing, or do it not,
Though God forwoot it er that I was wroght;	Though God knew it before I was born;
Or if his wityng streyneth never a deel	Or if his knowledge constrains not at all
But by necessitee condicioneel.	But by conditional necessity.
I wol nat han to do of swich mateere;	I will not have to do with such matter;
My tale is of a cok, as ye may heere,	My tale is of a cock, as you may hear,
That tok his conseil of his wyf, with sorwe,	Who took his counsel from his wife, with sorrow,
To walken in the yerd upon that morwe	To walk in the yard upon that morning
That he hadde met that dreem that I yow tolde.	That he had dreamed that dream of which I told you.
Wommennes conseils been ful ofte colde;	Women's counsels are very often fatal;
Wommannes conseil broghte us first to wo	Woman's counsel brought us first to woe
And made Adam fro Paradys to go,	And made Adam to go from Paradise,
Ther as he was ful myrie and wel at ese.	Where he was very merry and well at ease.
But for I noot to whom it myght displese,	But because I know not to whom it might displease,
If I conseil of wommen wolde blame,	If I would blame counsel of women,
Passe over, for I seyde it in my game.	Pass over, for I said it as a joke.
Rede auctours, where they trete of swich mateere,	Read authors, where they treat of such matter,
And what they seyn of wommen ye may heere.	And what they say of women you may hear.
Thise been the cokkes wordes, and nat myne;	These are the cock's words, and not mine;
I kan noon harm of no womman divyne.	I know no harm of any woman divine.
Faire in the soond, to bathe hire myrily,	Fair in the sand, to bathe her merrily,
Lith Pertelote, and alle hire sustres by,	Lies Pertelote, and all her sisters by her,
Agayn the sonne, and Chauntecleer so free	In the sunshine, and Chauntecleer so noble
Soong murier than the mermayde in the see	Sang more merrily than the mermaid in the sea
(For Phisiologus seith sikerly	(For Phisiologus says surely
How that they syngen wel and myrily).	How they sing well and merrily).
And so bifel that, as he caste his ye	And so befell that, as he cast his eye
Among the wortes on a boterflye,	On a butterfly among the cabbages,
He was war of this fox, that lay ful lowe.	He was aware of this fox, that lay very low.
Nothyng ne liste hym thanne for to crowe,	Not at all then did he want to crow,
But cride anon, "Cok! cok!" and up he sterte	But cried straightway, "Cock! cock!" and up he leaped
As man that was affrayed in his herte.	As one that was frightened in his heart.
For natureelly a beest desireth flee	For naturally a beast desires to flee
Fro his contrarie, if he may it see,	From his natural opponent, if he may see it,
Though he never erst hadde seyn it with his ye.	Though he never before had seen it with his eye.
This Chauntecleer, whan he gan hym espye,	This Chauntecleer, when he did espy him,
He wolde han fled, but that the fox anon	He would have fled, but that the fox straightway
Seyde, "Gentil sire, allas, wher wol ye gon?	Said, "Gentle sir, alas, where will you go?
Be ye affrayed of me that am youre freend?	Are you afraid of me who is your friend?
Now, certes, I were worse than a feend,	Now, certainly, I would be worse than a fiend,
If I to yow wolde harm or vileynye!	If I to you would do harm or villainy!
I am nat come youre conseil for t' espye,	I am not come to spy on your secrets,
But trewely, the cause of my comynge	But truly, the cause of my coming
Was oonly for to herkne how that ye synge.	Was only to hear how you sing.
For trewely, ye have as myrie a stevene	For truly, you have as merry a voice
As any aungel hath that is in hevene.	As has any angel that is in heaven.
Therwith ye han in musyk moore feelynge	Therewith you have in music more feeling
Than hadde Boece, or any that kan synge.	Than had Boethius, or any that knows how to sing.
My lord youre fader -- God his soule blesse! --	My lord your father -- God bless his soul! --
And eek youre mooder, of hire gentillesse,	And also your mother, of her graciousness,
Han in myn hous ybeen to my greet ese;	Have been in my house to my great pleasure;
And certes, sire, ful fayn wolde I yow plese.	And certainly, sir, I would very eagerly please you.
But, for men speke of syngyng, I wol seye --	But, insofar as men speak of singing, I will say --
So moote I brouke wel myne eyen tweye --	As I may well have use of my two eyes --
Save yow, I herde nevere man so synge	Except for you, I heard never man so sing
As dide youre fader in the morwenynge.	As did your father in the morning.
Certes, it was of herte, al that he song.	Certainly, it came from the heart, all that he sang.
And for to make his voys the moore strong,	And to make his voice the more strong,
He wolde so peyne hym that with bothe his yen	He would so exert himself that with both his eyes
He moste wynke, so loude he wolde cryen,	He had to wink, so loud he would cry,
And stonden on his tiptoon therwithal,	And stand on his tiptoes simultaneously,
And strecche forth his nekke long and smal.	And stretch forth his neck long and small.
And eek he was of swich discrecioun	And also he was of such sound judgment
That ther nas no man in no regioun	That there was no man in any region
That hym in song or wisedom myghte passe.	That might pass him in song or wisdom.
I have wel rad in `Daun Burnel the Asse,'	I have well read in `Dan Burnel the Ass,'
Among his vers, how that ther was a cok,	Among his verses, how there was a cock,
For that a preestes sone yaf hym a knok	Because a priest's son gave him a knock
Upon his leg whil he was yong and nyce,	Upon his leg while he was young and foolish,
He made hym for to lese his benefice.	He made him lose his benefice.
But certeyn, ther nys no comparisoun	But certainly, there is no comparison
Bitwixe the wisedom and discrecioun	Between the wisdom and discretion
Of youre fader and of his subtiltee.	Of your father and of his subtlety.
Now syngeth, sire, for seinte charitee;	Now sing, sir, for Saint Charity;
Lat se; konne ye youre fader countrefete?"	Let's see; can you imitate your father?"
This Chauntecleer his wynges gan to bete,	This Chauntecleer began to beat his wings,
As man that koude his traysoun nat espie,	As one that could not espy his treason,
So was he ravysshed with his flaterie.	He was so ravished with his flattery.
Allas, ye lordes, many a fals flatour	Alas, you lords, many a false flatterer
Is in youre courtes, and many a losengeour,	Is in your courts, and many a sycophant,
That plesen yow wel moore, by my feith,	Who please you well more, by my faith,
Than he that soothfastnesse unto yow seith.	Than he who says the truth unto you.
Redeth Ecclesiaste of flaterye;	Read Ecclesiastes about flattery;
Beth war, ye lordes, of hir trecherye.	Beware, you lords, of their treachery.
This Chauntecleer stood hye upon his toos,	This Chauntecleer stood high upon his toes,
Strecchynge his nekke, and heeld his eyen cloos,	Stretching his neck, and held his eyes closed,
And gan to crowe loude for the nones.	And began to crow loud for the occasion.
And daun Russell the fox stirte up atones,	And dan Russell the fox leaped up at once,
And by the gargat hente Chauntecleer,	And grabbed Chauntecleer by the throat,
And on his bak toward the wode hym beer,	And carried him on his back toward the woods,
For yet ne was ther no man that hym sewed.	For yet there was no one that pursued him.
O destinee, that mayst nat been eschewed!	O destiny, that may not be escaped!
Allas, that Chauntecleer fleigh fro the bemes!	Alas, that Chauntecleer flew from the beams!
Allas, his wyf ne roghte nat of dremes!	Alas, his wife took no heed of dreams!
And on a Friday fil al this meschaunce.	And on a Friday befell all this misfortune.
O Venus, that art goddesse of plesaunce,	O Venus, who art goddess of pleasure,
Syn that thy servant was this Chauntecleer,	Since this Chauntecleer was thy servant,
And in thy servyce dide al his poweer,	And in thy service did all his power,
Moore for delit than world to multiplye,	More for delight than to people the world,
Why woldestow suffre hym on thy day to dye?	Why wouldest thou allow him to die on thy day?
O Gaufred, deere maister soverayn,	O Gaufred, dear supreme master,
That whan thy worthy kyng Richard was slayn	Who when thy worthy king Richard was slain
With shot, compleynedest his deeth so soore,	By shot of an arrow, complained his death so grievously,
Why ne hadde I now thy sentence and thy loore,	Why had I not now thy wisdom and thy learning,
The Friday for to chide, as diden ye?	To chide the Friday, as you did?
For on a Friday, soothly, slayn was he.	For on a Friday, truly, he was slain.
Thanne wolde I shewe yow how that I koude pleyne	Then would I show you how that I could complain
For Chauntecleres drede and for his peyne.	For Chanticleer's dread and for his pain.
Certes, swich cry nelamentation	Certainly, such cry nor lamentation
Was nevere of ladyes maad whan Ylion	Was never made by ladies when Ilion (Troy)
Was wonne, and Pirrus with his streite swerd,	Was won, and Pirrus with his drawn sword,
Whan he hadde hent kyng Priam by the berd,	When he had seized king Priam by the beard,
And slayn hym, as seith us Eneydos,	And slain him, as the Aeneid tells us,
As maden alle the hennes in the clos,	As all the hens made in the yard,
Whan they had seyn of Chauntecleer the sighte.	When they had seen the sight of Chauntecleer.
But sovereynly dame Pertelote shrighte	But supremely dame Pertelote shrieked
Ful louder than dide Hasdrubales wyf,	Much louder than did Hasdrubales' wife,
Whan that hir housbonde hadde lost his lyf	When her husband had lost his life
And that the Romayns hadde brend Cartage.	And the Romans had burned Carthage.
She was so ful of torment and of rage	She was so full of torment and of rage
That wilfully into the fyr she sterte	That willfully into the fire she leaped
And brende hirselven with a stedefast herte.	And burned herself with a steadfast heart.
O woful hennes, right so criden ye	O woeful hens, exactly so you cried
As whan that Nero brende the citee	As when Nero burned the city
Of Rome cryden senatoures wyves	Of Rome senators' wives cried
For that hir husbondes losten alle hir lyves --	Because their husbands lost all their lives --
Withouten gilt this Nero hath hem slayn.	Without guilt this Nero has them slain.
Now wole I turne to my tale agayn.	Now will I turn to my tale again.
This sely wydwe and eek hir doghtres two	This poor widow and also her two daughters
Herden thise hennes crie and maken wo,	Heard these hens cry and make woe,
And out at dores stirten they anon,	And out at doors they rush anon,
And syen the fox toward the grove gon,	And see the fox go toward the grove,
And bar upon his bak the cok away,	And carried the cock away upon his back,
And cryden, "Out! Harrow and weylaway!	And cried, "Help! Help and alas!
Ha, ha! The fox!" and after hym they ran,	Ha, ha! The fox!" and after him they ran,
And eek with staves many another man.	And also with staves many another man.
Ran Colle oure dogge, and Talbot and Gerland,	Ran Colle our dog, and Talbot and Gerland,
And Malkyn, with a dystaf in hir hand;	And Malkyn, with a distaff in her hand;
Ran cow and calf, and eek the verray hogges,	Ran cow and calf, and also the very hogs,
So fered for the berkyng of the dogges	So frightened for the barking of the dogs
And shoutyng of the men and wommen eeke	And shouting of the men and women also
They ronne so hem thoughte hir herte breeke.	They ran so hard that they thought their hearts would break.
They yolleden as feendes doon in helle;	They yelled as fiends do in hell;
The dokes cryden as men wolde hem quelle;	The ducks cried as if men would them kill;
The gees for feere flowen over the trees;	The geese for fear flew over the trees;
Out of the hyve cam the swarm of bees.	Out of the hive came the swarm of bees.
So hydous was the noyse -- a, benedicitee! --	So hideous was the noise -- a, bless me! --
Certes, he Jakke Straw and his meynee	Certainly, he Jack Straw and his company
Ne made nevere shoutes half so shrille	Never made shouts half so shrill
Whan that they wolden any Flemyng kille,	When they would any Fleming kill,
As thilke day was maad upon the fox.	As that same day was made upon the fox.
Of bras they broghten bemes, and of box,	They brought trumpets of brass, and of box-wood,
Of horn, of boon, in whiche they blewe and powped,	Of horn, of bone, in which they blew and puffed,
And therwithal they skriked and they howped.	And with that they shrieked and they whooped.
It semed as that hevene sholde falle.	It seemed as if heaven should fall.
Now, goode men, I prey yow herkneth alle:	Now, good men, I pray you all to listen:
Lo, how Fortune turneth sodeynly	Lo, how Fortune turns suddenly
The hope and pryde eek of hir enemy!	The hope and pride also of her enemy!
This cok, that lay upon the foxes bak,	This cock, that lay upon the fox's back,
In al his drede unto the fox he spak,	In all his dread unto the fox he spoke,
And seyde, "Sire, if that I were as ye,	And said, "Sir, if I were you,
Yet sholde I seyn, as wys God helpe me,	Yet should I say, as God may help me,
`Turneth agayn, ye proude cherles alle!	`Turn again, all you proud churls!
A verray pestilence upon yow falle!	May a true pestilence fall upon you!
Now I am come unto the wodes syde;	Now I am come unto the wood's side;
Maugree youre heed, the cok shal heere abyde.	Despite all you could do, the cock shall here remain.
I wol hym ete, in feith, and that anon!'"	I will eat him, in faith, and that right away!'"
The fox answerde, "In feith, it shal be don."	The fox answered, "In faith, it shall be done."
And as he spak that word, al sodeynly	And as he spoke that word, all suddenly
This cok brak from his mouth delyverly,	This cock nimbly broke from his mouth,
And heighe upon a tree he fleigh anon.	And high upon a tree he quickly flew.
And whan the fox saugh that the cok was gon,	And when the fox saw that the cock was gone,
"Allas!" quod he, "O Chauntecleer, allas!	"Alas!" said he, "O Chauntecleer, alas!
I have to yow," quod he, "ydoon trespas,	I have to you," said he, "done offense,
In as muche as I maked yow aferd	In as much as I made you afraid
Whan I yow hente and broghte out of the yerd.	When I seized you and brought you out of the yard.
But, sire, I dide it in no wikke entente.	But, sir, I did it with no wicked intention.
Com doun, and I shal telle yow what I mente;	Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant;
I shal seye sooth to yow, God help me so!"	I shall say the truth to you, as God may help me!"
"Nay thanne," quod he, "I shrewe us bothe two.	"Nay then," said he, "I curse both of us two.
And first I shrewe myself, bothe blood and bones,	And first I curse myself, both blood and bones,
If thou bigyle me ofter than ones.	If thou trick me more often than once.
Thou shalt namoore thurgh thy flaterye	Thou shalt no more through thy flattery
Do me to synge and wynke with myn ye;	Make me sing and close my eyes;
For he that wynketh, whan he sholde see,	For he that closes his eyes, when he should see,
Al wilfully, God lat him nevere thee!"	All willfully, God let him never prosper!"
"Nay," quod the fox, "but God yeve hym meschaunce,	"Nay," said the fox, "but God give him misfortune,
That is so undiscreet of governaunce	Who is so indiscreet of governance
That jangleth whan he sholde holde his pees."	That he chatters when he should hold his peace."
Lo, swich it is for to be recchelees	Lo, such it is to be careless
And necligent, and truste on flaterye.	And negligent, and trust on flattery.
But ye that holden this tale a folye,	But you who hold this tale a folly,
As of a fox, or of a cok and hen,	As of a fox, or of a cock and hen,
Taketh the moralite, goode men.	Take the morality, good men.
For Seint Paul seith that al that writen is,	For Saint Paul says that all that is written,
To oure doctrine it is ywrite, ywis;	Is written for our instruction, indeed;
Taketh the fruyt, and lat the chaf be stille.	Take the fruit, and let the chaff be still.
Now, goode God, if that it be thy wille,	Now, good God, if it be thy will,
As seith my lord, so make us alle goode men,	As says my lord, make us all good men,
And brynge us to his heighe blisse! Amen.	And bring us to his high bliss! Amen.
"Sire Nonnes Preest," oure Hooste seide anoon,	"Sir Nun's Priest," our Host said straightway,
"I-blessed be thy breche, and every stoon!	"Blessed be thy buttocks, and every testicle!
This was a murie tale of Chauntecleer.	This was a merry tale of Chanticleer.
But by my trouthe, if thou were seculer,	But by my troth, if thou were a layman,
Thou woldest ben a trede-foul aright.	Thou would be an excellent copulator of fouls (rooster).
For if thou have corage as thou hast myght,	For if thou have as much desire as thou hast might,
Thee were nede of hennes, as I wene,	Thou would have need of hens, as I think,
Ya, moo than seven tymes seventene.	Yea, more than seven times seventeen.
See, whiche braunes hath this gentil preest,	See, what muscles has this gentle priest,
So gret a nekke, and swich a large breest!	So big a neck, and such a large chest!
He loketh as a sperhauk with his yen;	He looks like a sparrow-hauk with his eyes;
Him nedeth nat his colour for to dyen	He needs not paint his complexion
With brasile ne with greyn of Portyngale.	With red dye nor with grain of Portugal.
Now, sire, faire falle yow for youre tale!"	Now, sir, may good fortune come to you for your tale!"
And after that he, with ful merie chere,	And after that he, with a very merry manner,
Seide unto another, as ye shuln heere.	Said unto another, as you shall hear.
The Prologe of the Freres Tale.	The Prologue of the Friar's Tale.
This worthy lymytour, this noble Frere,	This worthy licensed beggar, this noble Friar
He made alwey a maner louryng chiere	He always made a kind of scowling face
Upon the Somonour, but for honestee	At the Summoner, but for propriety
No vileyns word as yet to hym spak he.	No churlish word as yet to him spoke he.
But atte laste he seyde unto the wyf,	"Dame," quod he, "God yeve yow right good lyf!
"My lady," said he, "God give you a right good life!	"My lady," said he, "God give you a right good life!
Ye han heer touched, also moot I thee,	You have here touched, as I may prosper,
In scole-matere greet difficultee.	On academic problems of great difficulty.
Ye han seyd muche thyng right wel, I seye;	You have said many things right well, I say;
But, dame, heere as we ryde by the weye,	But, my lady, here as we ride by the way,
Us nedeth nat to speken but of game,	We need not speak of anything but pleasant matters,
And lete auctoritees, on Goddes name,	And leave authoritative texts, in God's name,
To prechyng and to scoles of clergye.	To preaching and to the universities.
But if it lyke to this compaignye,	But if it pleases this company,
I wol yow of a somonour telle a game.	I will tell you an amusing tale about a summoner.
Pardee, ye may wel knowe by the name	By God, you can easily tell by the name
That of a somonour may no good be sayd;	That no good may be said of a summoner;
I praye that noon of you be yvele apayd.	I pray that none of you be displeased.
A somonour is a rennere up and doun	A summoner is a runner up and down
With mandementz for fornicacioun,	With summonses for fornication,
And is ybet at every townes ende."	And is beaten (and driven away) at every town's end."
Oure Hoost tho spak, "A, sire, ye sholde be hende	Our Host then spoke, "Ah, sir, you should be polite
And curteys, as a man of youre estaat;	And courteous, as (befits) a man of your rank;
In compaignye we wol have no debaat.	In this company we will have no arguments.
Telleth youre tale, and lat the Somonour be."	Tell your tale, and leave the Summoner alone."
"Nay," quod the Somonour, "lat hym seye to me	"Nay," said the Summoner, "let him say to me
What so hym list; whan it comth to my lot,	Whatever he pleases; when it comes to my turn,
By God, I shal hym quiten every grot.	By God, I shall pay him back every groat (fourpence).
I shal hym tellen which a greet honour	I shall tell him what a great honor
It is to be a flaterynge lymytour,	It is to be a flattering licensed beggar,
And of many another manere cryme	And of many another sort of crime
Which nedeth nat rehercen at this tyme;	Which need not be told at this time;
And his office I shal hym telle, ywis."	And how he does his job I shall tell him, indeed."
Oure Hoost answerde, "Pees, namoore of this!"	Our Host answered, "Quiet, no more of this!"
And after this he seyde unto the Frere,	And after this he said unto the Friar,
"Tel forth youre tale, leeve maister deere."	"Tell forth your tale, beloved master dear."
Heere bigynneth the Freres Tale	Here begins the Friar's Tale
Whilom ther was dwellynge in my contree	Once there was dwelling in my country
An erchedeken, a man of heigh degree,	An archdeacon, a man of high rank,
That boldely dide execucioun	That boldly carried out the law
In punysshynge of fornicacioun,	In punishment of fornication,
Of wicchecraft, and eek of bawderye,	Of witchcraft, and also of pandering,
Of diffamacioun, and avowtrye,	Of defamation of character, and adultery,
Of chirche reves, and of testamentz,	Of robbing churches, and of wills,
Of contractes and of lakke of sacramentz,	Of marriage contracts and of failure to take the sacraments,
Of usure, and of symonye also.	Of usury, and of simony also.
But certes, lecchours dide he grettest wo;	But certainly, to lechers did he the greatest woe;
They sholde syngen if that they were hent;	They had to sing out in pain if they were taken;
And smale tytheres weren foule yshent,	And those who paid less than full tithes were severely punished,
If any persoun wolde upon hem pleyne.	If any parson would complain about them.
Ther myghte asterte hym no pecunyal peyne.	There could escape him no monetary punishment (fine).
For smale tithes and for smal offrynge	For small tithes and for small offering
He made the peple pitously to synge,	He made the people piteously to sing out in pain,
For er the bisshop caughte hem with his hook,	For ere the bishop caught them with his crozier,
They weren in the erchedeknes book.	They were in the archdeacon's book.
Thanne hadde he, thurgh his jurisdiccioun,	Then had he, throughout his jurisdiction,
Power to doon on hem correccioun.	Power to have them punished.
He hadde a somonour redy to his hond;	He had a summoner ready at his hand;
A slyer boye nas noon in Engelond;	No one in England was a more clever rascal;
For subtilly he hadde his espiaille,	For deviously he had his network of spies,
That taughte hym wel wher that hym myghte availle.	That showed him well where there might be profit for him.
He koude spare of lecchours oon or two,	He could spare one or two of the lechers,
To techen hym to foure and twenty mo.	To direct him to four and twenty more.
For thogh this Somonour wood were as an hare,	For though this Summoner were mad as a hare,
To telle his harlotrye I wol nat spare;	To tell his wickedness I will not desist;
For we are out of his correccioun.	For we are exempt from his authority.
They han of us no jurisdiccioun,	They have over us no jurisdiction,
Ne nevere shullen, terme of alle hir lyves.	Nor never shall, until the end of all their lives.
"Peter! so been wommen of the styves,"	"By St. Peter! so are women of the brothels,"
Quod the Somonour, "yput out of oure cure!"	Said the Summoner, "put out of our jurisdiction!"
"Pees! with myschance and with mysaventure!"	"Quiet! with bad luck and with misfortune to you!"
Thus seyde oure Hoost, "and lat hym telle his tale.	Thus said our Host, "and let him tell his tale.
Now telleth forth, thogh that the Somonour gale;	Now tell forth, though the Summoner loudly complain;
Ne spareth nat, myn owene maister deere."	And tell everything, my own master dear."
This false theef, this somonour, quod the Frere,	This false thief, this summoner, said the Friar,
Hadde alwey bawdes redy to his hond,	Had always pimps as ready to his hand,
As any hauk to lure in Engelond,	As any hawk to come to the lure in England,
That tolde hym al the secree that they knewe,	Who told him all the secrets that they knew,
For hire acqueyntance was nat come of newe.	For their acquaintance was not come recently.
They weren his approwours prively.	They were secretly his agents.
He took hymself a greet profit therby;	He got himself a great profit in this way;
His maister knew nat alwey what he wan.	His master knew not always what he earned.
Withouten mandement a lewed man	Without an actual summons an ignorant man
He koude somne, on peyne of Cristes curs,	He could summon, on pain of excommunication,
And they were glade for to fille his purs	And they were glad to fill his purse
And make hym grete feestes atte nale.	And make him great feasts at the ale-house.
And right as Judas hadde purses smale,	And just as Judas had small amounts of the apostles' money,
And was a theef, right swich a theef was he;	And was a thief, exactly such a thief was he;
His maister hadde but half his duetee.	His master had but half the amount due to him.
He was, if I shal yeven hym his laude,	He was, if I shall give him his due praise,
A theef, and eek a somnour, and a baude.	A thief, and also a summoner, and a pimp.
He hadde eek wenches at his retenue,	He had also wenches in his employ,
That, wheither that sir Robert or sir Huwe,	That, whether sir Robert or sir Huwe,
Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoso that it were	Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoever it was
That lay by hem, they tolde it in his ere.	That lay by them, they told it in his ear.
Thus was the wenche and he of oon assent,	Thus were the wench and he in agreement,
And he wolde fecche a feyned mandement,	And he would fetch a forged court order,
And somne hem to chapitre bothe two,	And summon both of them to the archdeacon's court,
And pile the man, and lete the wenche go.	And rob the man, and let the wench go.
Thanne wolde he seye, "Freend, I shal for thy sake	Then would he say, "Friend, I shall for thy sake
Do striken hire out of oure lettres blake;	Have her stricken out of our records;
Thee thar namoore as in this cas travaille.	Thou need trouble thyself no more in this case.
I am thy freend, ther I thee may availle."	I am thy friend, where I can help thee."
Certeyn he knew of briberyes mo	Certainly he knew of more ways of stealing
Than possible is to telle in yeres two.	Than is possible to tell in two years.
For in this world nys dogge for the bowe	For in this world is no hunting dog
That kan an hurt deer from an hool yknowe	That can know a hurt deer from a whole one
Bet than this somnour knew a sly lecchour,	Better than this summoner knew a sly lecher,
Or an avowtier, or a paramour.	Or an adulterer, or a concubine.
And for that was the fruyt of al his rente,	And because that was the best part of all his income,
Therfore on it he sette al his entente.	Therefore on it he set all his intention.
And so bifel that ones on a day	And it so befell that once on a day
This somnour, evere waityng on his pray,	This summoner, ever lying in ambush for his prey,
Rood for to somne an old wydwe, a ribibe,	Rode to summon an old widow, an old crone,
Feynynge a cause, for he wolde brybe.	Pretending to have a case against her, for he wanted a bribe.
And happed that he saugh bifore hym ryde	And it happened that he saw before him ride
A gay yeman, under a forest syde.	A gay yeoman, alongside the edge of a forest.
A bowe he bar, and arwes brighte and kene;	A bow he bore, and arrows bright and keen;
He hadde upon a courtepy of grene,	He had upon him a short jacket of green,
An hat upon his heed with frenges blake.	A hat upon his head with fringes black.
"Sire," quod this somnour, "hayl, and wel atake!"	"Sir," said this summoner, "hail, and well met!"
"Welcome," quod he, "and every good felawe!	"Welcome," said he, "and every good fellow!
Wher rydestow, under this grene-wode shawe?"	Where ridest thou, alongside this green wood?"
Seyde this yeman, "Wiltow fer to day?"	Said this yeoman, "Wilt thou travel far today?"
This somnour hym answerde and seyde, "Nay;	This summoner him answered and said, "Nay;
Heere faste by," quod he, "is myn entente	Here close by," said he, "is my intention
To ryden, for to reysen up a rente	To ride, to collect a rent
That longeth to my lordes duetee."	That belongs to my lord's due income."
"Artow thanne a bailly?" "Ye," quod he.	"Art thou then a bailiff?" "Yes," said he.
He dorste nat, for verray filthe and shame	He dared not, for the true filth and shame
Seye that he was a somonour, for the name.	Of the name, say that he was a summoner.
"Depardieux," quod this yeman, "deere broother,	"By God," said this yeoman, "dear brother,
Thou art a bailly, and I am another.	Thou art a bailiff, and I am another.
I am unknowen as in this contree;	I am unknown in this country;
Of thyn aqueyntance I wolde praye thee,	Of thine acquaintance I would pray thee,
And eek of bretherhede, if that yow leste.	And also of brotherhood, if you wish.
I have gold and silver in my cheste;	I have gold and silver in my chest;
If that thee happe to comen in oure shire,	If thou happen to come in our shire,
Al shal be thyn, right as thou wolt desire."	All shall be thine, just as thou wilt desire."
"Grant mercy," quod this somonour, "by my feith!"	"Great thanks," said this summoner, "by my faith!"
Everych in ootheres hand his trouthe leith,	Each in other's hand pledges his troth,
For to be sworne bretheren til they deye.	To be sworn brothers until they die.
In daliance they ryden forth and pleye.	In pleasant conversation they ride forth and amuse themselves.
This somonour, which that was as ful of jangles	This summoner, who was as full of idle speech
As ful of venym been thise waryangles	As full of venom are these butcherbirds
And evere enqueryng upon every thyng,	And ever inquiring about every thing,
"Brother," quod he, "where is now youre dwellyng	"Brother," said he, "where is now your dwelling
Another day if that I sholde yow seche?"	If I should seek you another day?"
This yeman hym answerde in softe speche,	This yeoman him answered in gentle words,
"Brother," quod he, "fer in the north contree,	"Brother," said he, "far in the north country,
Whereas I hope som tyme I shal thee see.	Where I hope some time I shall thee see.
Er we departe, I shal thee so wel wisse	Ere we depart, I shall thee so well instruct
That of myn hous ne shaltow nevere mysse."	That thou shalt never miss my house."
"Now, brother," quod this somonour, "I yow preye,	"Now, brother," said this summoner, "I you pray,
Teche me, whil that we ryden by the weye,	Teach me, while we ride by the way,
Syn that ye been a baillif as am I,	Since you are a bailiff as am I,
Som subtiltee, and tel me feithfully	Some trickery, and tell me faithfully
In myn office how that I may moost wynne;	In my occupation how I may most profit;
And spareth nat for conscience ne synne,	And spare not for conscience nor sin,
But as my brother tel me, how do ye."	But as my brother tell me, how you do your business."
"Now, by my trouthe, brother deere," seyde he,	"Now, by my troth, brother dear," said he,
"As I shal tellen thee a feithful tale,	"I shall tell thee a true tale,
My wages been ful streite and ful smale.	My wages are very scanty and very small.
My lord is hard to me and daungerous,	My lord is hard to me and niggardly,
And myn office is ful laborous,	And my job is very hard work,
And therfore by extorcions I lyve.	And therefore by extortions I live.
For sothe, I take al that men wol me yive.	For truly, I take all that men will me give.
Algate, by sleyghte or by violence,	In every way, by trickery or by violence,
Fro yeer to yeer I wynne al my dispence.	From year to year I earn all my expenses.
I kan no bettre telle, feithfully."	I can no better tell, truthfully."
"Now certes," quod this Somonour, "so fare I.	"Now certainly," said this Summoner, "I do the same.
I spare nat to taken, God it woot,	I do not desist from taking anything, God knows,
But if it be to hevy or to hoot.	Unless it be too heavy or too hot.
What I may gete in conseil prively,	What I can get in private secretly,
No maner conscience of that have I.	No sort of pangs of conscience for that have I.
Nere myn extorcioun, I myghte nat lyven,	Were it not for my extortion, I could not live,
Ne of swiche japes wol I nat be shryven.	Nor of such tricks will I be confessed.
Stomak ne conscience ne knowe I noon;	Stomach (compassion) nor conscience know I none;
I shrewe thise shrifte-fadres everychoon.	I curse these confessors every one.
Wel be we met, by God and by Seint Jame!	Well are we met, by God and by Saint James!
But, leeve brother, tel me thanne thy name,"	But, dear brother, tell me then thy name,"
Quod this somonour. In this meene while	Said this summoner. Meanwhile
This yeman gan a litel for to smyle.	This yeoman began a little to smile.
"Brother," quod he, "wiltow that I thee telle?	"Brother," said he, "wilt thou that I thee tell?
I am a feend; my dwellyng is in helle,	I am a fiend; my dwelling is in hell,
And heere I ryde aboute my purchasyng,	And here I ride about on my acquisition of profits,
To wite wher men wol yeve me any thyng.	To know whether men will give me any thing.
My purchas is th'effect of al my rente.	What I acquire is the total of all my income.
Looke how thou rydest for the same entente,	Look how thou ridest for the same purpose,
To wynne good, thou rekkest nevere how;	To make a profit, thou carest never how;
Right so fare I, for ryde wolde I now	Right so do I, for I would ride now
Unto the worldes ende for a preye."	Unto the world's end for a prey."
"A!" quod this somonour, "benedicite! What sey ye?	"Ah!" said this summoner, "bless me! What say you?
I wende ye were a yeman trewely.	I supposed you were truly a yeoman.
Ye han a mannes shap as wel as I;	You have a man's shape as well as I;
Han ye a figure thanne determinat	Have you then a definite form
In helle, ther ye been in youre estat?"	In hell, where you are in your usual condition?"
"Nay, certeinly," quod he, "ther have we noon;	"Nay, certainly," said he, "there have we none;
But whan us liketh we kan take us oon,	But when we like we can take us one,
Or elles make yow seme we been shape;	Or else make it seem to you we are so shaped;
Somtyme lyk a man, or lyk an ape,	Sometimes like a man, or like an ape,
Or lyk an angel kan I ryde or go.	Or like an angel can I ride or walk about.
It is no wonder thyng thogh it be so;	It is no wonderful thing though it be so;
A lowsy jogelour kan deceyve thee,	A lousy conjurer can deceive thee,
And pardee, yet kan I moore craft than he."	And by God, yet I know more craft than he."
"Why," quod this somonour, "ryde ye thanne or goon	"Why," said this summoner, "ride you then or walk about
In sondry shap, and nat alwey in oon?"	In various shapes, and not always in one?"
"For we," quod he, "wol us swiche formes make	"Because we," said he, "will make us such forms
As moost able is oure preyes for to take."	As are most suitable for taking our prey."
"What maketh yow to han al this labour?"	"What makes you to have all this labor?"
"Ful many a cause, leeve sire somonour,"	"Very many a cause, dear sir summoner,"
Seyde this feend, "but alle thyng hath tyme.	Said this fiend, "but every thing has its time.
The day is short, and it is passed prime,	The day is short, and it is past nine a.m.,
And yet ne wan I nothyng in this day.	And yet I gained nothing in this day.
I wol entende to wynnyng, if I may,	I will concentrate on profit, if I may,
And nat entende oure wittes to declare.	And not attend to explaining our mental abilities.
For, brother myn, thy wit is al to bare	For, brother mine, thy wit is all too bare
To understonde, althogh I tolde hem thee.	To understand, even though I told them to thee.
But, for thou axest why labouren we --	But, since thou askest why labor we --
For somtyme we been Goddes instrumentz	For sometimes we are God's instruments
And meenes to doon his comandementz,	And means to do his commandments,
Whan that hym list, upon his creatures,	When he wishes, upon his creatures,
In divers art and in diverse figures.	In various methods and in various appearances.
Withouten hym we have no myght, certayn,	Without him we have no power, certainly,
If that hym list to stonden ther-agayn.	If he wishes to stand against us.
And somtyme, at oure prayere, han we leve	And sometimes, at our prayer, have we leave
Oonly the body and nat the soule greve;	Only the body and not the soul to grieve;
Witnesse on Job, whom that we diden wo.	Take the evidence of Job, to whom we did woe.
And somtyme han we myght of bothe two --	And sometimes have we power over both of the two --
This is to seyn, of soule and body eke.	This is to say, of soul and body as well.
And somtyme be we suffred for to seke	And sometimes we are allowed to harass
Upon a man and doon his soule unreste	A man and do his soul distress
And nat his body, and al is for the beste.	And not his body, and all is for the best.
Whan he withstandeth oure temptacioun,	When he withstands our temptation,
It is a cause of his savacioun,	It is a cause of his salvation,
Al be it that it was nat oure entente	Although it was not our intention
He sholde be sauf, but that we wolde hym hente.	He should be saved, but that we wanted to seize him.
And somtyme be we servant unto man,	And sometimes we are servants unto a man,
As to the erchebisshop Seint Dunstan,	As to the archbishop Saint Dunstan,
And to the apostles servant eek was I."	And to the apostles I was also a servant."
"Yet tel me," quod the somonour, "feithfully,	"Yet tell me," said the summoner, "truly,
Make ye yow newe bodies thus alway	Do you make yourself new bodies thus always
Of elementz?" The feend answerde, "Nay.	Of elements?" The fiend answered, "Nay.
Somtyme we feyne, and somtyme we aryse	Sometime we dissemble, and sometimes we arise
With dede bodyes, in ful sondry wyse,	With dead bodies, in very many manners,
And speke as renably and faire and wel	And speak as readily and faire and well
As to the Phitonissa dide Samuel.	As to the Phitonissa (Witch of Endor) did Samuel.
(And yet wol som men seye it was nat he;	(And yet will some men say it was not he;
I do no fors of youre dyvynytee.)	I put no store in your theology.)
But o thyng warne I thee, I wol nat jape:	But one thing I warn thee, I will not deceive you:
Thou wolt algates wite how we been shape;	Thou want especially to know how we are shaped;
Thou shalt herafterward, my brother deere,	Thou shalt hereafter, my brother dear,
Come there thee nedeth nat of me to leere,	Come where thou need not to learn from me,
For thou shalt, by thyn owene experience,	For thou shalt, by thine own experience,
Konne in a chayer rede of this sentence	Be able in a professorial chair to lecture on this subject
Bet than Virgile, while he was on lyve,	Better than Virgil, while he was alive,
Or Dant also. Now lat us ryde blyve,	Or Dante also. Now let us ride quickly,
For I wole holde compaignye with thee	For I will hold company with thee
Til it be so that thou forsake me."	Until it be that thou forsake me."
"Nay," quod this somonour, "that shal nat bityde!	"Nay," said this summoner, "that shall not happen!
I am a yeman, knowen is ful wyde;	I am a yeoman, as is very widely known;
My trouthe wol I holde, as in this cas.	My troth will I keep, in this case.
For though thou were the devel Sathanas,	For though thou were the devil Satan,
My trouthe wol I holde to my brother,	My troth will I hold to my brother,
As I am sworn, and ech of us til oother,	As I am sworn, and each of us to the other,
For to be trewe brother in this cas;	To be true brother in this case;
And bothe we goon abouten oure purchas.	And we both go about our acquisitions.
Taak thou thy part, what that men wol thee yive,	Take thou thy part, whatever men will thee give,
And I shal myn; thus may we bothe lyve.	And I shall mine; thus may we both live.
And if that any of us have moore than oother,	And if one of us have more than the other,
Lat hym be trewe and parte it with his brother."	Let him be true and share it with his brother."
"I graunte," quod the devel, "by my fey."	"I grant," said the devil, "by my faith."
And with that word they ryden forth hir wey.	And with that word they ride forth their way.
And right at the entryng of the townes ende,	And right at the entrance of the town,
To which this somonour shoop hym for to wende,	To which this summoner planned to go
They saugh a cart that charged was with hey,	They saw a cart that was loaded with hay,
Which that a cartere droof forth in his wey.	Which a carter drove forth in his way.
Deep was the wey, for which the carte stood.	Deep in mud was the road, for which the cart stood still.
The cartere smoot and cryde as he were wood,	The carter smote and cried as if he were crazy,
"Hayt, Brok! Hayt, Scot! What spare ye for the stones?	"Giddap, Brok! Giddap, Scot! Why do you stop pulling for the stones?
The feend," quod he, "yow fecche, body and bones,	The fiend," said he, "fetch you, body and bones,
As ferforthly as evere were ye foled,	As surely as ever you were born,
So muche wo as I have with yow tholed!	So much woe as I have with you suffered!
The devel have al, bothe hors and cart and hey!"	The devil have all, both horses and cart and hay!"
This somonour seyde, "Heere shal we have a pley."	This summoner said, "Here shall we have some fun."
And neer the feend he drough, as noght ne were,	And nearer the fiend he drew, as if it were nothing,
Ful prively, and rowned in his ere:	Very discreetly, and whispered in his ear:
"Herkne, my brother, herkne, by thy feith!	"Hearken, my brother, hearken, by thy faith!
Herestow nat how that the cartere seith?	Hearest thou not what the carter says?
Hent it anon, for he hath yeve it thee,	Seize it at once, for he has given it to thee,
Bothe hey and cart, and eek his caples thre."	Both hay and cart, and also his three horses."
"Nay," quod the devel, "God woot, never a deel!	"Nay," said the devil, "God knows, never a bit!
It is nat his entente, trust me weel.	It is not his intention, trust me well.
Axe hym thyself, if thou nat trowest me;	Ask him thyself, if thou not believe me;
Or elles stynt a while, and thou shalt see."	Or else wait a while, and thou shalt see."
This cartere thakketh his hors upon the croupe,	This carter whacks his horses upon the hindquarters,
And they bigonne to drawen and to stoupe.	And they began to pull and to stoop.
"Heyt! Now," quod he, "ther Jhesu Crist yow blesse,	"Giddap! Now," said he, "may Jesus Christ you bless,
And al his handwerk, bothe moore and lesse!	And all his handiwork, both more and less!
That was wel twight, myn owene lyard boy.	That was well pulled, my own dappled boy.
I pray God save thee, and Seinte Loy!	I pray God save thee, and Saint Loy!
Now is my cart out of the slow, pardee!"	Now is my cart out of the mud, by God!"
"Lo, brother," quod the feend, "what tolde I thee?	"Lo, brother," said the fiend, "what told I thee?
Heere may ye se, myn owene deere brother,	Here may you see, my own dear brother,
The carl spak oo thing, but he thoghte another.	The churl spoke one thing, but he thought another.
Lat us go forth abouten oure viage;	Let us go forth on our undertaking;
Heere wynne I nothyng upon cariage."	Here gain I nothing from a tax on horse and cart."
Whan that they coomen somwhat out of towne,	When they came a short way out of town,
This somonour to his brother gan to rowne:	This summoner to his brother began to whisper:
"Brother," quod he, "heere woneth an old rebekke	"Brother," said he, "here dwells an old crone
That hadde almoost as lief to lese hire nekke	Who would be almost as willing to lose her neck
As for to yeve a peny of hir good.	As to give up a penny of her goods.
I wole han twelf pens, though that she be wood,	I will have twelve pence, even if she be driven mad,
Or I wol sompne hire unto oure office;	Or I will summon her unto our court;
And yet, God woot, of hire knowe I no vice.	And yet, God knows, of her know I no vice.
But for thou kanst nat, as in this contree,	But since thou can not, in this country,
Wynne thy cost, taak heer ensample of me."	Earn thy living, learn here by my example."
This somonour clappeth at the wydwes gate.	This summoner knocks at the widow's gate.
"Com out," quod he, "thou olde virytrate!	"Come out," said he, "thou old hag!
I trowe thou hast som frere or preest with thee."	I believe thou hast some friar or priest with thee."
"Who clappeth?" seyde this wyf, "benedicitee!	"Who knocks?" said this wife, "bless me!
God save you, sire, what is youre sweete wille?"	God save you, sir, what is your sweet will?"
"I have," quod he, "of somonce here a bille;	"I have," said he, "here a writ of summons;
Up peyne of cursyng, looke that thou be	Upon pain of excommunication, look that thou be
Tomorn bifore the erchedeknes knee	Tomorrow morning before the archdeacon's knee
T' answere to the court of certeyn thynges."	To answer to the court about certain things."
"Now, Lord," quod she, "Crist Jhesu, kyng of kynges,	"Now, Lord," said she, "Christ Jesus, king of kings,
So wisly helpe me, as I ne may.	Surely help me, since I can not.
I have been syk, and that ful many a day.	I have been sick, and that full many a day.
I may nat go so fer," quod she, "ne ryde,	I can not walk so far," said she, "nor ride,
But I be deed, so priketh it in my syde.	Without being dead, it so pains in my side.
May I nat axe a libel, sire somonour,	May I not ask for a written copy of the charge, sir summoner,
And answere there by my procuratour	And answer there by my representative
To swich thyng as men wole opposen me?"	To such thing as men will bring against me?"
"Yis," quod this somonour, "pay anon -- lat se --	"Yes," said this summoner, "pay at once -- let's see --
Twelf pens to me, and I wol thee acquite.	Twelve pens to me, and I will thee acquit.
I shal no profit han therby but lite;	I shall have no profit thereby but little;
My maister hath the profit and nat I.	My master has the profit and not I.
Com of, and lat me ryden hastily;	Hurry up, and let me ride hastily;
Yif me twelf pens, I may no lenger tarye."	Give me twelve pens, I can no longer tarry."
"Twelf pens!" quod she, "Now, lady Seinte Marie	"Twelve pence!" said she, "Now, lady Saint Marie
So wisly help me out of care and synne,	Surely help me out of care and sin,
This wyde world thogh that I sholde wynne,	Though I should gain this wide world (if I had it),
Ne have I nat twelf pens withinne myn hoold.	I have not twelve pence within my possession.
Ye knowen wel that I am povre and oold;	You know well that I am poor and old;
Kithe youre almesse on me, povre wrecche."	Show your charity on me, poor wretch."
"Nay thanne," quod he, "the foule feend me fecche	"Nay then," said he, "the foul fiend me fetch
If I th' excuse, though thou shul be spilt!"	If I excuse thee, though thou should be dead!"
"Allas!" quod she, "God woot, I have no gilt."	"Alas!" said she, "God knows, I have no guilt."
"Pay me," quod he, "or by the sweete Seinte Anne,	"Pay me," said he, "or by the sweet Saint Anne,
As I wol bere awey thy newe panne	I will carry off thy new pan
For dette which thou owest me of old.	For debt which thou owest me since long ago.
Whan that thou madest thyn housbonde cokewold,	When thou madest thine husband cuckold,
I payde at hoom for thy correccioun."	I paid at our court the fine for thy punishment."
"Thou lixt!" quod she, "by my savacioun,	"Thou lie!" said she, "by my salvation,
Ne was I nevere er now, wydwe ne wyf,	I was never ere now, widow nor wife,
Somoned unto youre court in al my lyf;	Summoned unto your court in all my life;
Ne nevere I nas but of my body trewe!	Nor was I ever anything but true of my body!
Unto the devel blak and rough of hewe	Unto the devil black and rough of appearance
Yeve I thy body and my panne also!"	Give I thy body and my pan also!"
And whan the devel herde hire cursen so	And when the devil heard her so curse
Upon hir knees, he seyde in this manere,	Upon her knees, he said in this manner,
"Now, Mabely, myn owene mooder deere,	"Now, Mabely, my own mother dear,
Is this youre wyl in ernest that ye seye?"	Is this your will in earnest that you say?"
"The devel," quod she, "so fecche hym er he deye,	"The devil," said she, "so fetch him ere he die,
And panne and al, but he wol hym repente!"	And pan and all, unless he will repent!"
"Nay, olde stot, that is nat myn entente,"	"Nay, old slut, that is not my intention,"
Quod this somonour, "for to repente me	Said this summoner, "to repent
For any thyng that I have had of thee.	For any thing that I have had of thee.
I wolde I hadde thy smok and every clooth!"	I would I had thy smock and every bit of your clothing!"
"Now, brother," quod the devel, "be nat wrooth;	"Now, brother," said the devil, "be not angry;
Thy body and this panne been myne by right.	Thy body and this pan are mine by right.
Thou shalt with me to helle yet tonyght,	Thou shalt go with me to hell yet tonight,
Where thou shalt knowen of oure privetee	Where thou shalt know of our secrets
Moore than a maister of dyvynytee."	More than a Master of Divinity."
And with that word this foule feend hym hente;	And with that word this foul fiend seized him;
Body and soule he with the devel wente	Body and soul he with the devil went
Where as that somonours han hir heritage.	Where summoners have their heritage.
And God, that maked after his ymage	And God, that made after his image
Mankynde, save and gyde us, alle and some,	Mankind, save and guide us, one and all,
And leve thise somonours goode men bicome!	And grant that these summoners become good men!
Lordynges, I koude han toold yow, quod this Frere,	Gentlemen, I could have told you, said this Friar,
Hadde I had leyser for this Somnour heere,	Had I had been given time by this Summoner here,
After the text of Crist, Poul, and John,	According to the text of Christ, Paul, and John,
And of oure othere doctours many oon,	And of our other doctors of the Church many a one,
Swiche peynes that youre hertes myghte agryse,	Such pains that your hearts might tremble,
Al be it so no tonge may it devyse,	Even though no tongue can describe it,
Thogh that I myghte a thousand wynter telle	Though I could for a thousand years tell
The peynes of thilke cursed hous of helle.	The pains of that cursed house of hell.
But for to kepe us fro that cursed place,	But to keep us from that cursed place,
Waketh and preyeth Jhesu for his grace	Keep vigil and pray Jesus for his grace
So kepe us fro the temptour Sathanas.	To protect us from the tempter Satan.
Herketh this word! Beth war, as in this cas:	Hearken this word! Beware, as in this case:
"The leoun sit in his awayt alway	"The lion sits in his ambush always
To sle the innocent, if that he may."	To slay the innocent, if he can."
Disposeth ay youre hertes to withstonde	Dispose always your hearts to withstand
The feend, that yow wolde make thral and bonde.	The fiend, who would make you thrall and enslaved.
He may nat tempte yow over youre myght,	He may not tempt you beyond your power,
For Crist wol be youre champion and knyght.	For Christ will be your champion and knight.
And prayeth that thise somonours hem repente	And pray that these summoners themselves repent
Of hir mysdedes, er that the feend hem hente!	Of their misdeeds, ere the fiend seize them!
Heere endeth the Freres Tale.	Here ends the Friar's Tale.
"Squier, com neer, if it youre wille be,	"Squire, come nearer, if it be your will,
And sey somwhat of love, for certes ye	And say something about love, for certainly you
Konnen theron as muche as any man."	Know as much about that as any man."
"Nay, sire," quod he, "but I wol seye as I kan	"Nay, sir," said he, "but I will speak as I can
With hertly wyl, for I wol nat rebelle	With a hearty will, for I will not rebel
Agayn youre lust; a tale wol I telle.	Against your desire; a tale I will tell.
Have me excused if I speke amys;	Have me excused if I speak amiss;
My wyl is good, and lo, my tale is this."	My will is good, and lo, my tale is this."
Here bigynneth the Squieres Tale.	Here begins the Squire's Tale.
At Sarray, in the land of Tartarye,	At Sarray, in the land of Tartars,
Ther dwelte a kyng that werreyed Russye,	There dwelt a king who waged war on Russia,
Thurgh which ther dyde many a doughty man.	Through which there died many a doughty man.
This noble kyng was cleped Cambyuskan,	This noble king was called Cambyuskan,
Which in his tyme was of so greet renoun	Who in his time was of such great renown
That ther was nowher in no regioun	That there was nowhere in any region
So excellent a lord in alle thyng:	So excellent a lord in all things:
Hym lakked noght that longeth to a kyng.	He lacked nothing that is appropriate to a king.
As of the secte of which that he was born	In accord with the religion in which he was born
He kepte his lay, to which that he was sworn;	He kept its law, to which he was sworn;
And therto he was hardy, wys, and riche,	And moreover he was hardy, wise, and rich,
And pitous and just, alwey yliche;	And compassionate and just, always impartial;
Sooth of his word, benigne, and honurable;	Truthful of his word, benign, and honorable;
Of his corage as any centre stable;	Of his heart as stable as the center of any circle;
Yong, fressh, and strong, in armes desirous	Young, vigorous, and strong, in arms as desirous (to excel)
As any bacheler of al his hous.	As any young knight of all his household.
A fair persone he was and fortunat,	He was a handsome person and fortunate,
And kept alwey so wel roial estat	And always so well maintained the splendor appropriate to his rank
That ther was nowher swich another man.	That there was nowhere such another man.
This noble kyng, this Tartre Cambyuskan,	This noble king, this Tartar Cambyuskan,
Hadde two sones on Elpheta his wyf,	Had two sons on Elpheta his wife,
Of whiche the eldeste highte Algarsyf;	Of whom the eldest was called Algarsyf;
That oother sone was cleped Cambalo.	That other son was called Cambalo.
A doghter hadde this worthy kyng also,	A daughter had this worthy king also,
That yongest was, and highte Canacee.	That youngest was, and was called Canacee.
But for to telle yow al hir beautee,	But to tell you all her beauty,
It lyth nat in my tonge, n' yn my konnyng;	It lies not in my tongue, nor in my abilities;
I dar nat undertake so heigh a thyng.	I dare not undertake so high a thing.
Myn Englissh eek is insufficient.	My English also is insufficient.
It moste been a rethor excellent	He must be an excellent rhetorician
That koude his colours longynge for that art,	Who knows his figures of speech appropriate to that art,
If he sholde hire discryven every part.	If he should describe her in every detail.
I am noon swich, I moot speke as I kan.	I am none such, I must speak as I can.
And so bifel that whan this Cambyuskan	And it so befell that when this Cambyuskan
Hath twenty wynter born his diademe,	Has twenty winters borne his diadem,
As he was wont fro yeer to yeer, I deme,	As he was accustomed from year to year, I suppose,
He leet the feeste of his nativitee	He had the feast of his nativity
Doon cryen thurghout Sarray his citee,	Proclaimed throughout Sarray his city,
The laste Idus of March, after the yeer.	Exactly March , in the ordinary course of the year.
Phebus the sonne ful joly was and cleer,	Phoebus the sun full jolly was and clear,
For he was neigh his exaltacioun	For he was near his position of greatest power
In Martes face and in his mansioun	In Mars' face and in his astrological house
In Aries, the colerik hoote signe.	In Aries, the choleric hot sign.
Ful lusty was the weder and benigne,	Full pleasant was the weather and mild,
For which the foweles, agayn the sonne sheene,	For which the fowls, in response to the bright sun,
What for the sesoun and the yonge grene,	What for the season and the young greenery,
Ful loude songen hire affecciouns.	Full loudly sang of their desires.
Hem semed han geten hem protecciouns	They seemed to have gotten themselves protections
Agayn the swerd of wynter, keene and coold.	Against the sword of winter, keen and cold.
This Cambyuskan, of which I have yow toold,	This Cambyuskan, of whom I have you told,
In roial vestiment sit on his deys,	In royal vestments sits on his dais,
With diademe, ful heighe in his paleys,	With diadem, full nobly in his palace,
And halt his feeste so solempne and so ryche	And holds his feast so solemn and so rich
That in this world ne was ther noon it lyche;	That in this world there was none like it;
Of which if I shal tellen al th' array,	Of which if I should tell all the festivities,
Thanne wolde it occupie a someres day,	Then would it occupy a summer's day,
And eek it nedeth nat for to devyse	And also it is not necessary to describe
At every cours the ordre of hire servyse.	At every course the order of their service.
I wol nat tellen of hir strange sewes,	I will not tell of their strange stews,
Ne of hir swannes, ne of hire heronsewes.	Nor of their swans, nor of their young herons.
Eek in that lond, as tellen knyghtes olde,	Also in that land, as old knights tell,
Ther is som mete that is ful deynte holde	There is some food that is considered very delicious
That in this lond men recche of it but smal;	That in this land is reckoned of but little value;
Ther nys no man that may reporten al.	There is no man that can report all.
I wol nat taryen yow, for it is pryme	I will not tarry you, for it is nine a.m.
And for it is no fruyt but los of tyme;	And because it is not essential to the tale but a loss of time;
Unto my firste I wole have my recours.	Unto my first topic I will return.
And so bifel that after the thridde cours,	And so it befell that after the third course,
Whil that this kyng sit thus in his nobleye,	While this king sits thus in his nobility,
Herknynge his mynstralles hir thynges pleye	Listening to his minstrels playing their instruments
Biforn hym at the bord deliciously,	Before him at the table delightfully,
In at the halle dore al sodeynly	In at the hall door all suddenly
Ther cam a knyght upon a steede of bras,	There came a knight upon a steed of brass,
And in his hand a brood mirour of glas.	And in his hand a broad mirror of glass.
Upon his thombe he hadde of gold a ryng,	Upon his thumb he had of gold a ring,
And by his syde a naked swerd hangyng;	And by his side a naked sword hanging;
And up he rideth to the heighe bord.	And up he rides to the high table.
In al the halle ne was ther spoken a word	In all the hall there was not spoken a word
For merveille of this knyght; hym to biholde	For marveling at this knight; him to behold
Ful bisily they wayten, yonge and olde.	Full intently they gaze, young and old.
This strange knyght, that cam thus sodeynly,	This strange knight, who came thus suddenly,
Al armed, save his heed, ful richely,	All armed, except his head, full richly,
Saleweth kyng and queene and lordes alle,	Salutes king and queen and all the lords,
By ordre, as they seten in the halle,	In the order in which they sat in the hall,
With so heigh reverence and obeisaunce,	With such high reverence and respect,
As wel in speche as in contenaunce,	As well in speech as in countenance,
That Gawayn, with his olde curteisye,	That Gawain, with his old courtesy,
Though he were comen ayeyn out of Fairye,	Though he were come again out of Fairyland,
Ne koude hym nat amende with a word.	Could not amend one word of his speech.
And after this, biforn the heighe bord,	And after this, before the high table,
He with a manly voys seide his message,	He with a manly voice said his message,
After the forme used in his langage,	In accordance with the form used in his language,
Withouten vice of silable or of lettre;	Without one mistake of syllable or of letter;
And for his tale sholde seme the bettre,	And in order that his tale should seem the better,
Accordant to his wordes was his cheere,	Conforming to his words was his facial expression,
As techeth art of speche hem that it leere.	As teaches the art of speech to those who learn it.
Al be that I kan nat sowne his stile,	Although I can not imitate his style,
Ne kan nat clymben over so heigh a style,	Nor can not climb over so high a stile,
Yet seye I this, as to commune entente:	Yet say I this, as to his general meaning:
Thus muche amounteth al that evere he mente,	Thus much amounts all that ever he meant (to say),
If it so be that I have it in mynde.	If it so be that I have it (correctly) in mind.
He seyde, "The kyng of Arabe and of Inde,	He said, "The king of Araby and of India,
My lige lord, on this solempne day	My liege lord, on this solemn day
Saleweth yow, as he best kan and may,	Salutes you, as he best knows how and can,
And sendeth yow, in honour of youre feeste,	And sends you, in honor of your feast,
By me, that am al redy at youre heeste,	By me, who am all ready to obey your command,
This steede of bras, that esily and weel	This steed of brass, that easily and well
Kan in the space of o day natureel --	Can in the space of one natural day --
This is to seyn, in foure and twenty houres --	This is to say, in four and twenty hours --
Wher-so yow lyst, in droghte or elles shoures,	Where-ever you desire, in drought or else showers,
Beren youre body into every place	Bear your body into every place
To which youre herte wilneth for to pace,	To which your heart wishes to go,
Withouten wem of yow, thurgh foul or fair;	Without harm to you, through foul or fair;
Or, if yow lyst to fleen as hye in the air	Or, if you desire to fly as high in the air
As dooth an egle whan hym list to soore,	As does an eagle when he desires to soar,
This same steede shal bere yow evere moore,	This same steed shall bear you ever more,
Withouten harm, til ye be ther yow leste,	Without harm, until you be where you wished,
Though that ye slepen on his bak or reste,	Though you sleep or rest on his back,
And turne ayeyn with writhyng of a pyn.	And return again with twisting of a peg.
He that it wroghte koude ful many a gyn.	He who made it knew full many an ingenious contrivance.
He wayted many a constellacion	He observed many a configuration of the stars
Er he had doon this operacion,	Before he had finished this operation,
And knew ful many a seel and many a bond.	And knew full many a magical seal and many a controlling force.
"This mirour eek, that I have in myn hond,	"This mirror also, that I have in my hand,
Hath swich a myght that men may in it see	Has such a power that men can in it see
Whan ther shal fallen any adversitee	When there shall befall any adversity
Unto youre regne or to youreself also,	Unto your reign or to yourself also,
And openly who is youre freend or foo.	And clearly who is your friend or foe.
"And over al this, if any lady bright	"And in addition to all this, if any fair lady
Hath set hire herte on any maner wight,	Has set her heart on any sort of creature,
If he be fals, she shal his tresoun see,	If he be false, she shall his treason see,
His newe love, and al his subtiltee,	His new love, and all his trickery,
So openly that ther shal no thyng hyde.	So clearly that there shall no thing be hidden.
Wherfore, ageyn this lusty someres tyde,	For this reason, (to protect) against this amorous spring time,
This mirour and this ryng, that ye may see,	This mirror and this ring, that you can see,
He hath sent to my lady Canacee,	He has sent to my lady Canacee,
Youre excellente doghter that is heere.	Your excellent daughter that is here.
"The vertu of the ryng, if ye wol heere,	"The power of the ring, if you will hear,
Is this: that if hire lust it for to were	Is this: that if she wishes to wear it
Upon hir thombe or in hir purs it bere,	Upon her thumb or bear it in her purse,
Ther is no fowel that fleeth under the hevene	There is no fowl that flies under the heaven
That she ne shal wel understonde his stevene,	That she shall not well understand his speech,
And knowe his menyng openly and pleyn,	And know his meaning openly and plain,
And answere hym in his langage ageyn;	And answer him in his language in reply;
And every gras that groweth upon roote	And every herb that grows upon root
She shal eek knowe, and whom it wol do boote,	She shall also know, and to whom it will provide a remedy,
Al be his woundes never so depe and wyde.	Although his wounds be ever so deep and wide.
"This naked swerd, that hangeth by my syde,	"This naked sword, that hangs by my side,
Swich vertu hath that what man so ye smyte	Such power has that whatever man you smite
Thurghout his armure it wole kerve and byte,	Throughout his armor it will carve and bite,
Were it as thikke as is a branched ook;	Were it as thick as is a branched oak;
And what man that is wounded with the strook	And whatever man that is wounded by the stroke
Shal never be hool til that yow list, of grace,	Shall never be whole until you please, out of kindness,
To stroke hym with the plat in thilke place	To stroke him with the flat side in that same place
Ther he is hurt; this is as muche to seyn,	Where he is hurt; this is as much to say,
Ye moote with the platte swerd ageyn	You must with the blunt side of the sword again
Stroke hym in the wounde, and it wol close.	Stroke him in the wound, and it will close.
This is a verray sooth, withouten glose;	This is a very truth, without lying;
It failleth nat whils it is in youre hoold."	It fails not while it is in your possesion."
And whan this knyght hath thus his tale toold,	And when this knight has thus his tale told,
He rideth out of halle and doun he lighte.	He rides out of hall and down he alit.
His steede, which that shoon as sonne brighte,	His steed, which shone like the bright sun,
Stant in the court, stille as any stoon.	Stands in the court, still as any stone.
This knyght is to his chambre lad anoon,	This knight is to his chamber led straightway,
And is unarmed, and to mete yset.	And is unarmed, and set to dinner.
The presentes been ful roially yfet --	The presents are full royally fetched --
This is to seyn, the swerd and the mirour --	This is to say, the sword and the mirror --
And born anon into the heighe tour	And carried straightway into the high tower
With certeine officers ordeyned therfore;	By certain officers appointed for this purpose;
And unto Canacee this ryng is bore	And unto Canacee this ring is carried
Solempnely, ther she sit at the table.	Solemnly, where she sits at the table.
But sikerly, withouten any fable,	But truly, without any lie,
The hors of bras, that may nat be remewed,	The horse of brass, that can not be moved,
It stant as it were to the ground yglewed.	It stands as if it were glued to the ground.
Ther may no man out of the place it dryve	No man there can drive it out of the place
For noon engyn of wyndas or polyve;	Despite any contrivance of windlass or pulley;
And cause why? For they kan nat the craft.	And the reason why? Because they do not know the craft.
And therfore in the place they han it laft	And therefore in the place they have it left
Til that the knyght hath taught hem the manere	Until the knight has taught them the manner
To voyden hym, as ye shal after heere.	To remove him, as you shall later hear.
Greet was the prees that swarmeth to and fro	Great was the crowd that swarms to and fro
To gauren on this hors that stondeth so,	To stare on this horse that stands so,
For it so heigh was, and so brood and long,	For it was so high, and so broad and long,
So wel proporcioned for to been strong,	So well proportioned to be strong,
Right as it were a steede of Lumbardye;	Exactly as if it were a steed of Lombardy;
Therwith so horsly, and so quyk of ye,	In additon, with such equine virtues, and so quick of eye,
As it a gentil Poilleys courser were.	As if it were a noble Apulian courser.
For certes, fro his tayl unto his ere	For certainly, from his tail unto his ear
Nature ne art ne koude hym nat amende	Nature nor art could him not amend
In no degree, as al the people wende.	To any extent, as all the people believed.
But everemoore hir mooste wonder was	But evermore their greatest wonder was
How that it koude gon, and was of bras;	How it could move, and yet was of brass;
It was a fairye, as the peple semed.	It was from fairyland, as it seemed to the people.
Diverse folk diversely they demed;	Diverse folk diversely they deemed;
As many heddes, as manye wittes ther been.	As many heads, as many opinions there are.
They murmureden as dooth a swarm of been,	They murmured as does a swarm of bees,
And maden skiles after hir fantasies,	And made arguments according to their fantasies,
Rehersynge of thise olde poetries,	Retelling these old poems,
And seyden it was lyk the Pegasee,	And said it was like the Pegasus,
The hors that hadde wynges for to flee;	The hors that had wings in order to fly;
Or elles it was the Grekes hors Synon,	Or else it was Sinon the Greek's horse,
That broghte Troie to destruccion,	That brought Troy to destruction,
As men in thise olde geestes rede.	As men in these old romances read.
"Myn herte," quod oon, "is everemoore in drede;	"My heart," said one, "is evermore in dread;
I trowe som men of armes been therinne,	I believe some men of arms are in there,
That shapen hem this citee for to wynne.	That prepare themselves to conquer this city.
It were right good that al swich thyng were knowe."	It would be very good if all such things were known."
Another rowned to his felawe lowe,	Another whispered to his fellow quietly,
And seyde, "He lyeth, for it is rather lyk	And said, "He lies, for it is rather like
An apparence ymaad by som magyk,	An illusion made by some magic,
As jogelours pleyen at thise feestes grete."	Such as conjurers play at these great feasts."
Of sondry doutes thus they jangle and trete,	Of various conjectures thus they chatter and debate,
As lewed peple demeth comunly	As ignorant people speculate commonly
Of thynges that been maad moore subtilly	Of things that are made more subtly
Than they kan in hir lewednesse comprehende;	Than they in their ignorance can comprehend;
They demen gladly to the badder ende.	They habitually suppose the worse.
And somme of hem wondred on the mirour,	And some of them wondered about the mirror,
That born was up into the maister-tour,	That was carried up into the principal tower,
Hou men myghte in it swiche thynges se.	How men might in it see such things.
Another answerde and seyde it myghte wel be	Another answered and said it might well be
Naturelly, by composiciouns	Naturally, by arrangements
Of anglis and of slye reflexiouns,	Of angles and of ingenious reflections,
And seyde that in Rome was swich oon.	And said that in Rome was such a one.
They speken of Alocen, and Vitulon,	They speak of Alocen, and Vitulon,
And Aristotle, that writen in hir lyves	And Aristotle, that wrote while they lived
Of queynte mirours and of perspectives,	Of intricate mirrors and of optical lenses,
As knowen they that han hir bookes herd.	As know they who have heard their books (read aloud).
And oother folk han wondred on the swerd	And other folk have wondered on the sword
That wolde percen thurghout every thyng,	That would pierce throughout every thing,
And fille in speche of Thelophus the kyng,	And fell in speech of Thelophus the king,
And of Achilles with his queynte spere,	And of Achilles with his magical spear,
For he koude with it bothe heele and dere,	For he could with it both heal and harm,
Right in swich wise as men may with the swerd	Exactly in such a way as men may do with the sword
Of which right now ye han youreselven herd.	Of which right now you have yourselves heard.
They speken of sondry hardyng of metal,	They speak of various ways of hardening of metal,
And speke of medicynes therwithal,	And speak of chemicals moreover,
And how and whanne it sholde yharded be,	And how and when it should be hardened,
Which is unknowe, algates unto me.	Which is unknown, at least unto me.
Tho speeke they of Canacees ryng,	Then they speak of Canacee's ring,
And seyden alle that swich a wonder thyng	And all said that such a wondrous thing
Of craft of rynges herde they nevere noon,	Of the craft of making rings they never heard anything,
Save that he Moyses and kyng Salomon	Save that he Moses and king Solomon
Hadde a name of konnyng in swich art.	Had a reputation for cunning in such art.
Thus seyn the peple and drawen hem apart.	Thus say the people and draw themselves aside.
But nathelees somme seiden that it was	But nonetheless some said that it was
Wonder to maken of fern-asshen glas,	Wondrous to make glass out of ashes of fern,
And yet nys glas nat lyk asshen of fern;	And yet glass is not like ashes of fern;
But, for they han yknowen it so fern,	But, because they have known it so long,
Therfore cesseth hir janglyng and hir wonder.	Therefore ceases their chattering and their wonder.
As soore wondren somme on cause of thonder,	As intensely some wonder about the cause of thunder,
On ebbe, on flood, on gossomer, and on myst,	About ebb tide, about flood tide, about spider webs, and about mist,
And alle thyng, til that the cause is wyst.	And all things, until the cause is known.
Thus jangle they, and demen, and devyse	Thus they chatter, and conjecture, and speculate
Til that the kyng gan fro the bord aryse.	Until the king did from the table arise.
Phebus hath laft the angle meridional,	Phebus (the sun) has left the noon-time angle,
And yet ascendynge was the beest roial,	And yet ascending was the beast royal,
The gentil Leon, with his Aldiran,	The noble Lion, with his star Aldiran,
Whan that this Tartre kyng, Cambyuskan,	When this Tarter king, Cambyuskan,
Roos fro his bord, ther as he sat ful hye.	Rose from his table, where he sat full high.
Toforn hym gooth the loude mynstralcye	Before him goes the loud music
Til he cam to his chambre of parementz,	Until he came to his chamber of tapestries (Presence Chamber),
Ther as they sownen diverse instrumentz	Where they sound diverse instruments
That it is lyk an hevene for to heere.	That it is like a heaven to hear.
Now dauncen lusty Venus children deere,	Now dance lusty Venus's children dear,
For in the Fyssh hir lady sat ful hye,	For in the Fish (Pisces) their lady sat full high,
And looketh on hem with a freendly ye.	And looks on them with a friendly eye.
This noble kyng is set upon his trone.	This noble king is set upon his throne.
This strange knyght is fet to hym ful soone,	This foreign knight is fetched to him right away,
And on the daunce he gooth with Canacee.	And on the dance he goes with Canacee.
Heere is the revel and the jolitee	Here is the revel and the jollity
That is nat able a dul man to devyse.	That a dull-witted man is not able to describe.
He moste han knowen love and his servyse	He must have known love and its service
And been a feestlych man as fressh as May,	And be a convivial man as gay as May,
That sholde yow devysen swich array.	That should describe for you such splendor.
Who koude telle yow the forme of daunces	Who could tell you the form of dances
So unkouthe, and swiche fresshe contenaunces,	So strange, and such cheerful countenances,
Swich subtil lookyng and dissymulynges	Such subtle looking and dissimulations
For drede of jalouse mennes aperceyvynges?	For dread of jealous men's perceptions?
No man but Launcelot, and he is deed.	No man but Launcelot, and he is dead.
Therfore I passe of al this lustiheed;	Therefore I pass over all this pleasure;
I sey namoore, but in this jolynesse	I say no more, but in this jollity
I lete hem til men to the soper dresse.	I leave them until people go to the supper.
The styward bit the spices for to hye,	The steward ordered the spiced cakes to be brought quickly,
And eek the wyn, in al this melodye.	And also the wine, amid all this music.
The usshers and the squiers been ygoon,	The ushers and the squires are gone,
The spices and the wyn is come anoon.	The spiced cakes and the wine are come quickly.
They ete and drynke, and whan this hadde an ende,	They eat and drink, and when this had an end,
Unto the temple, as reson was, they wende.	Unto the temple, as was reasonable, they wend.
The service doon, they soupen al by day.	The service done, they sup all day long.
What nedeth yow rehercen hire array?	What need is there to tell you their splendor?
Ech man woot wel that a kynges feeste	Each man knows well that a king's feast
Hath plentee to the meeste and to the leeste,	Has plenty for the highest ranks and for the lowest,
And deyntees mo than been in my knowyng.	And dainties more than are in my knowing.
At after-soper gooth this noble kyng	At after-supper goes this noble king
To seen this hors of bras, with al a route	To see this horse of brass, with all in a crowd
Of lordes and of ladyes hym aboute.	Of lords and of ladies about him.
Swich wondryng was ther on this hors of bras	Such wondering was there about this horse of brass
That syn the grete sege of Troie was,	That since the great siege of Troy was,
Theras men wondreden on an hors also,	Where men wondered about a horse also,
Ne was ther swich a wondryng as was tho.	Nor was there such a wondering as was then.
But fynally the kyng axeth this knyght	But finally the king asks this knight
The vertu of this courser and the myght,	About the power of this courser and the might,
And preyde hym to telle his governaunce.	And prayed him to tell how to control him.
This hors anoon bigan to trippe and daunce,	This horse at once began to trip and dance,
Whan that this knyght leyde hand upon his reyne,	When this knight laid hand upon his rein,
And seyde, "Sire, ther is namoore to seyne,	And said, "Sir, there is no more to say,
But, whan yow list to ryden anywhere,	But, when you desire to ride anywhere,
Ye mooten trille a pyn, stant in his ere,	You must turn a peg, which stands in his ear,
Which I shal yow telle bitwix us two.	Which I shall you tell between us two(secretly).
Ye moote nempne hym to what place also,	You must name him to what place also,
Or to what contree, that yow list to ryde.	Or to what country, that you want to ride.
And whan ye come ther as yow list abyde,	And when you come where you desire to abide,
Bidde hym descende, and trille another pyn,	Bid him descend, and turn another peg,
For therin lith th' effect of al the gyn,	For therein lies the essence of working the device,
And he wol doun descende and doon youre wille,	And he will down descend and do your will,
And in that place he wol abyde stille.	And in that place he will abide still.
Though al the world the contrarie hadde yswore,	Though all the world the contrary had sworn,
He shal nat thennes been ydrawe ne ybore.	He shall not thence be drawn nor carried away.
Or, if yow liste bidde hym thennes goon,	Or, if you wish to bid him go thence,
Trille this pyn, and he wol vanysshe anoon	Turn this peg, and he will vanish at once
Out of the sighte of every maner wight,	Out of the sight of every sort of creature,
And come agayn, be it by day or nyght,	And come again, be it by day or night,
Whan that yow list to clepen hym ageyn	When you wish to call him again
In swich a gyse as I shal to yow seyn	In such a manner as I shall to you say
Bitwixe yow and me, and that ful soone.	Between you and me, and that very soon.
Ride whan yow list; ther is namoore to doone."	Ride when you wish; there is nothing more to do."
Enformed whan the kyng was of that knyght,	When the king was informed by that knight,
And hath conceyved in his wit aright	And has correctly understood
The manere and the forme of al this thyng,	The manner and the form of all this matter,
Ful glad and blithe, this noble doughty kyng	Full glad and blithe, this noble doughty king
Repeireth to his revel as biforn.	Returns to his revel as before.
The brydel is unto the tour yborn	The bridle is carried unto the tower
And kept among his jueles leeve and deere.	And kept among his jewels precious and dear.
The hors vanysshed, I noot in what manere,	The horse vanished, I know not in what manner,
Out of hir sighte; ye gete namoore of me.	Out of their sight; you get no more from me.
But thus I lete in lust and jolitee	But thus I leave in pleasure and jollity
This Cambyuskan his lordes festeiynge	This Cambyuskan entertaining his lords
Til wel ny the day bigan to sprynge.	Until well nigh the day began to spring.
The norice of digestioun, the sleep,	The nurse of digestion, the sleep,
Gan on hem wynke and bad hem taken keep	Did on them wink (as a signal) and bad them take notice
That muchel drynke and labour wolde han reste;	That much drink and activity make rest necessary;
And with a galpyng mouth hem alle he keste,	And with a yawning mouth he kissed them all,
And seyde that it was tyme to lye adoun,	And said that it was time to lie down,
For blood was in his domynacioun.	For blood (the humor) was in its domination.
"Cherisseth blood, natures freend," quod he.	"Cherish blood, nature's friend," said he.
They thanken hym galpynge, by two, by thre,	They thank him yawning, by two, by three,
And every wight gan drawe hym to his reste,	And every creature did draw himself to his rest,
As sleep hem bad; they tooke it for the beste.	As sleep them bad; they took it for the best.
Hire dremes shul nat now been toold for me;	Their dreams shall not now be told for me;
Ful were hire heddes of fumositee,	Their heads were full of fumes from drinking wine,
That causeth dreem of which ther nys no charge.	That causes dreams of which there is no significance.
They slepen til that it was pryme large,	They sleep until it was nine a.m.,
The mooste part, but it were Canacee.	The most part, except for Canacee.
She was ful mesurable, as wommen be;	She was very temperate, as women are;
For of hir fader hadde she take leve	For of her father had she taken leave
To goon to reste soone after it was eve.	To go to rest soon after it was evening.
Hir liste nat appalled for to be,	She did not wish to be grown pale,
Ne on the morwe unfeestlich for to se,	Nor in the morning to appear unfestive,
And slepte hire firste sleep, and thanne awook.	And slept her first sleep, and then awoke.
For swich a joye she in hir herte took	For such a joy she in her heart took
Bothe of hir queynte ryng and hire mirour,	Both of her strange ring and her mirror,
That twenty tyme she changed hir colour;	That twenty times she changed her color;
And in hire sleep, right for impressioun	And in her sleep, directly because of the mental impression
Of hire mirour, she hadde a visioun.	Made by her mirror, she had a vision.
Wherfore, er that the sonne gan up glyde,	Therefore, before the sun did glide upward,
She cleped on hir maistresse hire bisyde,	She called on her governess who was beside her,
And seyde that hire liste for to ryse.	And said that she wished to rise.
Thise olde wommen that been gladly wyse,	These old women who are customarily wise,
As is hire maistresse, answerde hire anon,	As is her governess, answered her at once,
And seyde, "Madame, whider wil ye goon	And said, "Madame, whither do you wish to go
Thus erly, for the folk been alle on reste?"	Thus early, for the folk are all in bed?"
"I wol," quod she, "arise, for me leste	"I want," said she, "to arise -- for I desire
Ne lenger for to slepe, and walke aboute."	No longer to sleep -- and walk about."
Hire maistresse clepeth wommen a greet route,	Her governess calls a great crowd of women,
And up they rysen, wel a ten or twelve;	And up they rise, a good ten or twelve;
Up riseth fresshe Canacee hireselve,	Up rises fresh Canacee herself,
As rody and bright as dooth the yonge sonne,	As ruddy and bright(ly shining) as does the young sun,
That in the Ram is foure degrees up ronne --	That in the Ram is four degrees up run --
Noon hyer was he whan she redy was --	No higher was he when she was ready --
And forth she walketh esily a pas,	And forth she walks at an easy pace,
Arrayed after the lusty seson soote	Clothed, in accord with the lusty season sweet,
Lightly, for to pleye and walke on foote,	Lightly, to amuse herself and walk on foot,
Nat but with fyve or sixe of hir meynee;	With no more than five or six of her entourage;
And in a trench forth in the park gooth she.	And in a path forth in the park goes she.
The vapour which that fro the erthe glood	The vapor that glided up from the earth
Made the sonne to seme rody and brood;	Made the sun seem ruddy and broad;
But nathelees it was so fair a sighte	But nonetheless it was so fair a sight
That it made alle hire hertes for to lighte,	That it made all their hearts to lighten,
What for the seson and the morwenynge,	What for the season and the dawning,
And for the foweles that she herde synge.	And for the fowls that she heard sing.
For right anon she wiste what they mente	For right away she knew what they meant
Right by hir song, and knew al hire entente.	Exactly by their song, and knew all their meaning.
The knotte why that every tale is toold,	The main point for which every tale is told,
If it be taried til that lust be coold	If it is delayed until the desire (to hear it) is cold
Of hem that han it after herkned yoore,	Of those who have listened to it for a long time,
The savour passeth ever lenger the moore,	The taste (for it) passes away more and more,
For fulsomnesse of his prolixitee;	Because of the overabundance of its prolixity;
And by the same resoun, thynketh me,	And by the same reason, it seems to me,
I sholde to the knotte condescende,	I should proceed to the main point,
And maken of hir walkyng soone an ende.	And quickly put an end to her walking.
Amydde a tree, for drye as whit as chalk,	In a tree, for dryness as white as chalk,
As Canacee was pleyyng in hir walk,	As Canacee was amusing herself in her walk,
Ther sat a faucon over hire heed ful hye,	There sat a falcon over her head full high,
That with a pitous voys so gan to crye	That with a pitiful voice so did cry
That all the wode resouned of hire cry.	That all the wood resounded with her cry.
Ybeten hadde she hirself so pitously	She had beaten herself so pitifully
With bothe hir wynges til the rede blood	With both her wings until the red blood
Ran endelong the tree ther-as she stood.	Ran down the length of the tree in which she stood.
And evere in oon she cryde alwey and shrighte,	And continually she cried always and shrieked,
And with hir beek hirselven so she prighte	And with her beak herself she so stabbed
That ther nys tygre, ne noon so crueel beest	That there is no tiger, nor any beast so cruel
That dwelleth outher in wode or in forest,	That dwells either in wood or in forest,
That nolde han wept, if that he wepe koude,	That would not have wept, if he could weep,
For sorwe of hire, she shrighte alwey so loude.	For sorrow of her, she shrieked always so loud.
For ther nas nevere yet no man on lyve,	For there was never yet no man alive,
If that I koude a faucon wel discryve,	If I could well describe a falcon,
That herde of swich another of fairnesse,	That heard of its equal in beauty,
As wel of plumage as of gentillesse	As well in plumage as in nobility
Of shap, of al that myghte yrekened be.	In shape, in all that might reckoned be.
A faucon peregryn thanne semed she	A peregrine falcon then seemed she
Of fremde land; and everemoore, as she stood,	From foreign land; and repeatedly, as she stood,
She swowneth now and now for lak of blood,	She swoons every now and then for lack of blood,
Til wel neigh is she fallen fro the tree.	Until well nigh is she fallen from the tree.
This faire kynges doghter, Canacee,	This fair king's daughter, Canacee,
That on hir fynger baar the queynte ryng,	That on her finger bore the strange ring,
Thurgh which she understood wel every thyng	Through which she well understood every thing
That any fowel may in his leden seyn,	That any fowl may in his language say,
And koude answeren hym in his ledene ageyn,	And could answer him in his language in return,
Hath understonde what this faucon seyde,	Has understood what this falcon said,
And wel neigh for the routhe almoost she deyde.	And well nigh for the pity she almost died.
And to the tree she gooth ful hastily,	And to the tree she goes full hastily,
And on this faukon looketh pitously,	And on this falcon looks compassionately,
And heeld hir lappe abrood, for wel she wiste	And spread wide her skirt, for well she knew
The faukon moste fallen fro the twiste,	The falcon must fall from the branch,
Whan that it swowned next, for lak of blood.	When it swooned next, for lack of blood.
A longe whil to wayten hire she stood	A long while to await her she stood
Til atte laste she spak in this manere	Until at the last she spoke in this manner
Unto the hauk, as ye shal after heere:	Unto the hawk, as you shall after hear:
"What is the cause, if it be for to telle,	"What is the cause, if it may be told,
That ye be in this furial pyne of helle?"	That you be in this pain such as the Furies suffer in hell?"
Quod Canacee unto this hauk above.	Said Canacee unto this hawk above.
"Is this for sorwe of deeth or los of love?	"Is this for sorrow of death or loss of love?
For, as I trowe, thise been causes two	For, as I believe, these are the two causes
That causen moost a gentil herte wo;	That most cause woe to a gentle heart;
Of oother harm it nedeth nat to speke.	Of other harm there is no need to speak.
For ye youreself upon yourself yow wreke,	For you avenge yourself upon yourself,
Which proveth wel that outher ire or drede	Which proves well that either anger or fear
Moot been enchesoun of youre cruel dede,	Must be the reason for your cruel deed,
Syn that I see noon oother wight yow chace.	Since I see no other creature hunt you.
For love of God, as dooth youreselven grace,	For love of God, spare yourself,
Or what may been youre help? For west nor est	Or what can be your help? For west nor east
Ne saugh I nevere er now no bryd ne beest	I saw never ere now no bird nor beast
That ferde with hymself so pitously.	That treated himself so piteously.
Ye sle me with youre sorwe verraily,	You slay me with your sorrow truly,
I have of yow so greet compassioun.	I have of you such great compassion.
For Goddes love, com fro the tree adoun;	For God's love, come down from the tree;
And as I am a kynges doghter trewe,	And as I am a king's daughter true,
If that I verraily the cause knewe	If that I truly knew the cause
Of youre disese, if it lay in my myght,	Of your malady, if it lay in my power,
I wolde amenden it er that it were nyght,	I would amend it ere it were night,
As wisly helpe me grete God of kynde!	So help me great God of nature!
And herbes shal I right ynowe yfynde	And herbs shall I in abundance find
To heel with youre hurtes hastily."	With which to heal your hurts quickly."
Tho shrighte this faucon yet moore pitously	Then shrieked this falcon yet more pitifully
Than ever she dide, and fil to grounde anon,	Than ever she did, and fell to ground straightway,
And lith aswowne, deed and lyk a stoon,	And lies in a swoon, dead and like a stone,
Til Canacee hath in hire lappe hire take	Until Canacee has in her lap her taken
Unto the tyme she gan of swough awake.	Until the time she awoke from the swoon.
And after that she of hir swough gan breyde,	And after she started up from her swoon,
Right in hir haukes ledene thus she seyde:	Right in her hawk's language thus she said:
"That pitee renneth soone in gentil herte,	"That pity runs soon in a gentle heart,
Feelynge his similitude in peynes smerte,	Feeling its counterpart in sharp pains,
Is preved alday, as men may it see,	Is proven every day, as men may it see,
As wel by werk as by auctoritee;	As well by deeds as by written authority;
For gentil herte kitheth gentillesse.	For a gentle heart makes known its noble character.
I se wel that ye han of my distresse	I see well that you have of my distress
Compassion, my faire Canacee,	Compassion, my faire Canacee,
Of verray wommanly benignytee	Out of true womanly goodness
That Nature in youre principles hath set.	That Nature in your natural disposition has set.
But for noon hope for to fare the bet,	But for no hope to fare the better,
But for to obeye unto youre herte free,	But to obey unto your heart noble,
And for to maken othere be war by me,	And to make others be warned by my example,
As by the whelp chasted is the leon,	As by the whelp chastised is the lion,
Right for that cause and that conclusion,	Right for that cause and to that conclusion,
Whil that I have a leyser and a space,	While that I have the time and the opportunity,
Myn harm I wol confessen er I pace."	My harm I will reveal ere I go away."
And evere, whil that oon hir sorwe tolde,	And ever, while that one her sorrow told,
That oother weep as she to water wolde	That other wept as she would turn to water
Til that the faucon bad hire to be stille,	Until the falcon prayed her to be still,
And, with a syk, right thus she seyde hir wille:	And, with a sigh, right thus she spoke her mind:
"Ther I was bred -- allas, that ilke day! --	"Where I was bred -- alas, that same day! --
And fostred in a roche of marbul gray	And fostered on a cliff of marble gray
So tendrely that no thyng eyled me,	So tenderly that no thing ailed me,
I nyste nat what was adversitee	I knew not what was adversity
Til I koude flee ful hye under the sky.	Until I could fly full high under the sky.
Tho dwelte a tercelet me faste by,	Then dwelt a male falcon very near me,
That semed welle of alle gentillesse;	That seemed an exemplar of all nobility;
Al were he ful of treson and falsnesse,	Although he was full of treason and falseness,
It was so wrapped under humble cheere,	It was so concealed under humble bearing,
And under hewe of trouthe in swich manere,	And under the appearance of truth in such a manner,
Under plesance, and under bisy peyne,	Under pleasantness, and under careful attentiveness,
That no wight koude han wend he koude feyne,	That no creature could have supposed he could feign,
So depe in greyn he dyed his coloures.	So deeply in a fast dye he dyed his true colors.
Right as a serpent hit hym under floures	Just as a serpent hides himself under flowers
Til he may seen his tyme for to byte,	Until he can see his time to bite,
Right so this god of loves ypocryte	Just so this god of love's hypocrite
Dooth so his cerymonyes and obeisaunces,	So does his ceremonies and obeisances,
And kepeth in semblaunt alle his observaunces	And keeps in outward appearance all his observances
That sownen into gentillesse of love.	That are in accord with nobility in love.
As in a toumbe is al the faire above,	As in a tomb all the beauty is above,
And under is the corps, swich as ye woot,	And under is the corpse, as you know,
Swich was this ypocrite, bothe coold and hoot.	Such was this hypocrite, in every circumstance.
And in this wise he served his entente	And in this manner he served his own purpose
That, save the feend, noon wiste what he mente,	So that, except for the fiend, no one knew what he meant,
Til he so longe hadde wopen and compleyned,	Until he so long had wept and complained,
And many a yeer his service to me feyned,	And many a year his service to me feigned,
Til that myn herte, to pitous and to nyce,	Until my heart, too compassionate and too naive,
Al innocent of his crouned malice,	Entirely ignorant of his consummate malice,
Forfered of his deeth, as thoughte me,	Very frightened that he might die, as it seemed to me,
Upon his othes and his seuretee,	Upon receiving his oaths and his pledges,
Graunted hym love, upon this condicioun,	Granted him love, upon this condition,
That everemoore myn honour and renoun	That evermore my honor and renown
Were saved, bothe privee and apert;	Were safe, both in private and in public (in all ways);
This is to seyn, that after his desert,	This is to say, that according to his deserts,
I yaf hym al myn herte and al my thoght --	I gave him all my heart and all my thought --
God woot and he, that ootherwise noght --	God knows and he, I would not have agreed on any other terms --
And took his herte in chaunge of myn for ay.	And took his heart in exchange for mine for ever.
But sooth is seyd, goon sithen many a day,	But truly it is said, since many a day gone by,
`A trewe wight and a theef thenken nat oon.'	`An honest creature and a thief think not alike.'
And whan he saugh the thyng so fer ygoon	And when he saw the business so far advanced
That I hadde graunted hym fully my love	That I had granted him fully my love
In swich a gyse as I have seyd above,	In such a manner as I have said above,
And yeven hym my trewe herte as free	And gave him my true heart as freely
As he swoor he yaf his herte to me,	As he swore he gave his heart to me,
Anon this tigre, ful of doublenesse,	Immediately this tiger, full of treachery,
Fil on his knees with so devout humblesse,	Fell on his knees with such devout humility,
With so heigh reverence, and, as by his cheere,	With such high reverence, and, as seemed by his appearance,
So lyk a gentil lovere of manere,	So like a gentle lover in his manners,
So ravysshed, as it semed, for the joye	So ravished, as it seemed, for the joy
That nevere Jason ne Parys of Troye --	That never Jason nor Paris of Troy --
Jason? certes, ne noon oother man	Jason? certainly, nor any other man
Syn Lameth was, that alderfirst bigan	Since Lameth was, he who first of all began
To loven two, as writen folk biforn --	To love two, as folk wrote long ago --
Ne nevere, syn the firste man was born,	Nor ever, since the first man was born,
Ne koude man, by twenty thousand part,	Could (any) man, by (so much as) one twenty thousandth,
Countrefete the sophymes of his art,	Reproduce the deceptive sophisms of his art,
Ne were worthy unbokelen his galoche,	Nor were worthy to unbuckle his galosh,
Ther doublenesse or feynyng sholde approche,	Where duplicity or feigning were concerned,
Ne so koude thonke a wight as he dide me!	Nor so could thank a creature as he did to me!
His manere was an hevene for to see	His manner was a heaven to see
Til any womman, were she never so wys,	For any woman, were she never so wise,
So peynted he and kembde at point-devys	So painted he and made himself elegant in every way,
As wel his wordes as his contenaunce.	Both his words and his countenance.
And I so loved hym for his obeisaunce,	And I so loved him for his obeisance,
And for the trouthe I demed in his herte,	And for the truth I believed was in his heart,
That if so were that any thyng hym smerte,	That if it so were that any thing pained him,
Al were it never so lite, and I it wiste,	Although it were never so little, and I knew of it,
Me thoughte I felte deeth myn herte twiste.	It seemed to me I felt death twist my heart.
And shortly, so ferforth this thyng is went	And shortly, this business had gone forth so far
That my wyl was his willes instrument;	That my will was his will's instrument;
This is to seyn, my wyl obeyed his wyl	This is to say, my will obeyed his will
In alle thyng, as fer as reson fil,	In all things, so far as was consonant with reason,
Kepynge the boundes of my worshipe evere.	Keeping ever the limits set by my honor.
Ne nevere hadde I thyng so lief, ne levere,	Nor never loved anyone more, or even as much
As hym, God woot, ne nevere shal namo.	As him, God knows, nor never shall again.
"This laste lenger than a yeer or two,	"This lasted longer than a year or two,
That I supposed of hym noght but good.	That I supposed of him nothing but good.
But finally, thus atte laste it stood,	But finally, thus at the last it stood,
That Fortune wolde that he moste twynne	That Fortune would have it that he must depart
Out of that place which that I was inne.	Out of that place where I was.
Wher me was wo, that is no questioun;	Whether I was woeful, there is no question;
I kan nat make of it discripsioun.	I can not make a description of it.
For o thyng dar I tellen boldely:	For one thing I dare tell boldly:
I knowe what is the peyne of deeth therby;	By this experience I know what is the pain of death;
Swich harm I felte for he ne myghte bileve.	Such harm I felt because he could not remain.
So on a day of me he took his leve,	So one day he took his leave of me,
So sorwefully eek that I wende verraily	So sorrowfully also that I believed truly
That he had felt as muche harm as I,	That he had felt as much harm as I,
Whan that I herde hym speke and saugh his hewe.	When I heard him speak and saw his appearance.
But nathelees, I thoughte he was so trewe,	But nevertheless, I thought he was so true,
And eek that he repaire sholde ageyn	And also that he should return again
Withinne a litel while, sooth to seyn;	Within a little while, to say the truth;
And resoun wolde eek that he moste go	And it was reasonable also that he must go
For his honour, as ofte it happeth so,	For his honor, as often it happens so,
That I made vertu of necessitee,	So that I made virtue of necessity,
And took it wel, syn that it moste be.	And took it well, since it had to be.
As I best myghte, I hidde fro hym my sorwe,	As I best could, I hid from him my sorrow,
And took hym by the hond, Seint John to borwe,	And took him by the hand, with Saint John as my guarantor,
And seyde hym thus: `Lo, I am youres al;	And said to him thus: `Lo, I am all yours;
Beth swich as I to yow have been and shal.'	Be to me such as I to you have been and shall be.'
What he answerde, it nedeth noght reherce;	What he answered, it needs not be repeated;
Who kan sey bet than he, who kan do werse?	Who can speak better than he, who can act worse?
Whan he hath al wel seyd, thanne hath he doon.	When he has said everything well, then he has done (all he will do).
`Therfore bihoveth hire a ful long spoon	`Therefore she must have a very long spoon
That shal ete with a feend,' thus herde I seye.	Who shall eat with a fiend,' thus I have heard said.
So atte laste he moste forth his weye,	So at the last he had to go forth on his way,
And forth he fleeth til he cam ther hym leste.	And forth he speeds until he came where he pleased.
Whan it cam hym to purpos for to reste,	When he decided to rest,
I trowe he hadde thilke text in mynde,	I believe he had that text in mind,
That `alle thyng, repeirynge to his kynde,	That `every thing, by returning to its natural state,
Gladeth hymself;' thus seyn men, as I gesse.	Makes himself happy;' thus say men, as I suppose.
Men loven of propre kynde newefangelnesse,	Men, because of their nature, love novelty,
As briddes doon that men in cages fede.	As do birds that men feed in cages.
For though thou nyght and day take of hem hede,	For though thou take care of them night and day,
And strawe hir cage faire and softe as silk,	And strew their cages with straw fair and soft as silk,
And yeve hem sugre, hony, breed and milk,	And give them sugar, honey, bread and milk,
Yet right anon as that his dore is uppe	Yet just as soon as his door is left open
He with his feet wol spurne adoun his cuppe,	He with his feet will kick down his cup,
And to the wode he wole and wormes ete;	And to the wood he will go and eat worms;
So newefangel been they of hire mete,	They are so fond of novelty in their food,
And loven novelries of propre kynde,	And love novelties because of their nature,
No gentillesse of blood ne may hem bynde.	No nobility of blood can restrain them.
"So ferde this tercelet, allas the day!	"So fared this falcon, alas the day!
Though he were gentil born, and fressh and gay,	Though he was of noble birth, and fresh and gay,
And goodlich for to seen, and humble and free,	And goodly to look upon and humble and generous,
He saugh upon a tyme a kyte flee,	He saw upon a time a kite (scavenger bird) fly by,
And sodeynly he loved this kyte so	And suddenly he so loved this kite
That al his love is clene fro me ago,	That all his love is completely gone from me,
And hath his trouthe falsed in this wyse.	And has turned his truth false in this manner.
Thus hath the kyte my love in hire servyse,	Thus has the kite my lover in her service,
And I am lorn withouten remedie!"	And I am lost, without remedy!"
And with that word this faucon gan to crie	And with that word this falcon did cry out
And swowned eft in Canacees barm.	And swooned again in Canacee's lap.
Greet was the sorwe for the haukes harm	Great was the sorrow for the hawk's harm
That Canacee and alle hir wommen made;	That Canacee and all her women made;
They nyste hou they myghte the faucon glade.	They knew not how they might cheer up the falcon.
But Canacee hom bereth hire in hir lappe,	But Canacee carries her home enfolded in her gown,
And softely in plastres gan hire wrappe,	And softly did wrap her in bandages,
Ther as she with hire beek hadde hurt hirselve.	Where she with her beak had hurt herself.
Now kan nat Canacee but herbes delve	Now Canacee can do nothing but dig herbs
Out of the ground, and make salves newe	Out of the ground, and make new salves
Of herbes preciouse and fyne of hewe	Of herbs, precious and delicate in color,
To heelen with this hauk. Fro day to nyght	With which to heal this hawk. From dawn to nighttime
She dooth hire bisynesse and al hire myght,	She devotes her efforts and all her power,
And by hire beddes heed she made a mewe	And by her bed's head she made a pen
And covered it with veluettes blewe,	And covered it with velvet cloths, blue
In signe of trouthe that is in wommen sene.	As a sign of truth that is in women seen.
And al withoute, the mewe is peynted grene,	And on all the outside, the pen is painted green,
In which were peynted alle thise false fowles,	In which were painted all these false fowls,
As ben thise tidyves, tercelettes, and owles;	Such as are these small birds, falcons, and owls;
Right for despit were peynted hem bisyde,	For sheer scorn were painted beside them,
Pyes, on hem for to crie and chyde.	Magpies, to cry out against them and chide them.
Thus lete I Canacee hir hauk kepyng;	Thus I leave Canacee keeping her hawk;
I wol namoore as now speke of hir ryng	I will for now speak no more of her ring
Til it come eft to purpos for to seyn	Until it becomes again appropriate to tell
How that this faucon gat hire love ageyn	How this falcon got back her love,
Repentant, as the storie telleth us,	Repentant, as the story tells us,
By mediacion of Cambalus,	By the mediation of Cambalus,
The kynges sone, of which I yow tolde.	The king's son, of whom I told you.
But hennesforth I wol my proces holde	But henceforth I will keep to my narrative
To speken of aventures and of batailles	To speak of adventures and of battles
That nevere yet was herd so grete mervailles.	That never yet were heard such great marvels.
First wol I telle yow of Cambyuskan,	First will I tell you of Cambyuskan,
That in his tyme many a citee wan;	That in his time many a city won;
And after wol I speke of Algarsif,	And after I will speak of Algarsif,
How that he wan Theodora to his wif,	How he won Theodora to his wife,
For whom ful ofte in greet peril he was,	For whom full often in great peril he was,
Ne hadde he ben holpen by the steede of bras;	Had he not been helped by the steed of brass;
And after wol I speke of Cambalo,	And next I will speak of Cambalo,
That faught in lystes with the bretheren two	That fought in lists with the brethren two
For Canacee er that he myghte hire wynne.	For Canacee ere he could win her.
And ther I lefte I wol ayeyn bigynne.	And where I left off I will again begin.
Appollo whirleth up his chaar so hye	Appollo whirls up his chariot so high
Til that the god Mercurius hous, the slye --	To that house of the god Mercury, the sly --
"In feith, Squier, thow hast thee wel yquit	"In faith, Squire, thou hast well acquitted thyself.
And gentilly. I preise wel thy wit,"	And nobly. I praise well thy intelligence,"
Quod the Frankeleyn, "considerynge thy yowthe,	Said the Franklin, "considering thy youth,
So feelyngly thou spekest, sire, I allow the!	With such feeling thou speakest, sir, I praise thee!
As to my doom, ther is noon that is heere	In my opinion, there is no one that is here
Of eloquence that shal be thy peere,	That shall be thy equal in eloquence,
If that thou lyve; God yeve thee good chaunce,	If thou live; God give thee good luck,
And in vertu sende thee continuaunce,	And in virtue send thee perseverance,
For of thy speche I have greet deyntee.	For I take great pleasure in thy speech.
I have a sone, and by the Trinitee,	I have a son, and by the Trinity,
I hadde levere than twenty pound worth lond,	I had rather than have twenty pound's worth of land,
Though it right now were fallen in myn hond,	Though it right now were fallen in my hand,
He were a man of swich discrecioun	That he were a man of such discretion
As that ye been! Fy on possessioun,	As you are! Fie on possessions,
But if a man be vertuous withal!	Unless a man is virtuous as well!
I have my sone snybbed, and yet shal,	I have rebuked my son, and shall again,
For he to vertu listeth nat entende;	Because he has no desire to devote himself to virtue;
But for to pleye at dees, and to despende	But to play at dice, and to spend
And lese al that he hath is his usage.	And lose all that he has is his usage.
And he hath levere talken with a page	And he would rather talk with a serving boy
Than to comune with any gentil wight	Than converse with any noble person
Where he myghte lerne gentillesse aright."	From whom he might learn true nobility."
"Straw for youre gentillesse!" quod oure Hoost.	"Straw for your nobility!" said our Host.
"What, Frankeleyn! Pardee, sire, wel thou woost	"What, Franklin! By God, sir, well thou knowest
That ech of yow moot tellen atte leste	That each of you must tell at the least
A tale or two, or breken his biheste."	A tale or two, or break his promise."
"That knowe I wel, sire," quod the Frankeleyn.	"That know I well, sir," said the Franklin.
"I prey yow, haveth me nat in desdeyn,	"I pray you, hold me not in disdain,
Though to this man I speke a word or two."	Though to this man I speak a word or two."
"Telle on thy tale withouten wordes mo."	"Tell on thy tale without more words."
"Gladly, sire Hoost," quod he, "I wole obeye	"Gladly, sir Host," said he, "I will obey
Unto your wyl; now herkneth what I seye.	Unto your will; now hearken what I say.
I wol yow nat contrarien in no wyse	I will not offend you in any way
As fer as that my wittes wol suffyse.	So far as my mental abilities will suffice.
I prey to God that it may plesen yow;	I pray to God that it may please you;
Thanne woot I wel that it is good ynow."	Then I will know well that it is good enough."
Whilom, as olde stories tellen us,	Once, as old histories tell us,
Ther was a duc that highte Theseus;	There was a duke who was called Theseus;
Of Atthenes he was lord and governour,	He was lord and governor of Athens,
And in his tyme swich a conquerour	And in his time such a conqueror
That gretter was ther noon under the sonne.	That there was no one greater under the sun.
Ful many a riche contree hadde he wonne;	Very many a powerful country had he won;
What with his wysdom and his chivalrie,	What with his wisdom and his chivalry,
He conquered al the regne of Femenye,	He conquered all the land of the Amazons,
That whilom was ycleped Scithia,	That once was called Scithia,
And weddede the queene Ypolita,	And wedded the queen Ypolita,
And broghte hire hoom with hym in his contree	And brought her home with him into his country
With muchel glorie and greet solempnytee,	With much glory and great ceremony,
And eek hir yonge suster Emelye.	And also her young sister Emelye.
And thus with victorie and with melodye	And thus with victory and with festivity
Lete I this noble duc to Atthenes ryde,	I leave this noble duke riding to Athens,
And al his hoost in armes hym bisyde.	And all his host in arms beside him.
And certes, if it nere to long to heere,	And certainly, if it were not too long to hear,
I wolde have toold yow fully the manere	I would have told you fully the manner
How wonnen was the regne of Femenye	How the reign of Femenye was won
By Theseus and by his chivalrye;	By Theseus and by his chivalry;
And of the grete bataille for the nones	And of the great battle at that time
Bitwixen Atthenes and Amazones;	Between Athenians and Amazons;
And how asseged was Ypolita,	And how Ypolita was besieged,
The faire, hardy queene of Scithia;	The fair, bold queen of Scithia;
And of the feste that was at hir weddynge,	And of the festivity that was at their wedding,
And of the tempest at hir hoom-comynge;	And of the storm at her home-coming;
But al that thyng I moot as now forbere.	But all that matter I must now forgo.
I have, God woot, a large feeld to ere,	I have, God knows, a large field to till,
And wayke been the oxen in my plough.	And the oxen in my plow are weak.
The remenant of the tale is long ynough.	The remnant of the tale is long enough.
I wol nat letten eek noon of this route;	Also I will not hinder any one of this company;
Lat every felawe telle his tale aboute,	Let every fellow tell his tale in turn,
And lat se now who shal the soper wynne;	And let's see now who shall win the supper;
And ther I lefte, I wol ayeyn bigynne.	And where I left off, I will again begin.
This duc, of whom I make mencioun,	This duke, of whom I make mention,
Whan he was come almoost unto the toun,	When he was come almost unto the town,
In al his wele and in his mooste pride,	In all his prosperity and in his most pride,
He was war, as he caste his eye aside,	He was aware, as he cast his eye aside,
Where that ther kneled in the heighe weye	Where there kneeled in the high way
A compaignye of ladyes, tweye and tweye,	A company of ladies, two by two,
Ech after oother clad in clothes blake;	Each after another, clad in black clothes;
But swich a cry and swich a wo they make	But such a cry and such a woeful (lament) they make
That in this world nys creature lyvynge	That in this world is no living creature
That herde swich another waymentynge;	That (ever) heard lamentation such as this;
And of this cry they nolde nevere stenten	And of this cry they would not ever stop
Til they the reynes of his brydel henten.	Until they seized the reins of his bridle.
"What folk been ye, that at myn hom-comynge	"What folk are you, who at my homecoming
Perturben so my feste with criynge?"	So disturb my festival with crying?"
Quod Theseus. "Have ye so greet envye	Said Theseus. "Have you such great envy
Of myn honour, that thus compleyne and crye?	Of my honor, (you) who thus lament and cry?
Or who hath yow mysboden or offended?	Or who has injured or offended you?
And telleth me if it may been amended,	And tell me if it may be remedied,
And why that ye been clothed thus in blak."	And why you are clothed thus in black."
The eldeste lady of them alle spak,	The eldest lady of them all spoke,
Whan she hadde swowned with a deedly cheere,	After she had swooned with (so) deadly a countenance,
That it was routhe for to seen and heere;	That it was pitiful to see and hear;
She seyde, "Lord, to whom Fortune hath yiven	She said, "Lord, to whom Fortune has given
Victorie, and as a conqueror to lyven,	Victory, and (allowed) to live as a conqueror,
Nat greveth us youre glorie and youre honour,	Your glory and your honor does not grieve us,
But we biseken mercy and socour.	But we beseech (you for) mercy and succor.
Have mercy on oure wo and oure distresse!	Have mercy on our woe and our distress!
Som drope of pitee, thurgh thy gentillesse,	Some drop of pity, because of thy nobility,
Upon us wrecched wommen lat thou falle,	Let thou fall upon us wretched women,
For, certes, lord, ther is noon of us alle	For, certainly, lord, there is not one of us all
That she ne hath been a duchesse or a queene.	Who has not been a duchesse or a queen.
Now be we caytyves, as it is wel seene,	Now we are miserable wretches, as it is easily seen,
Thanked be Fortune and hire false wheel,	Thanks be to Fortune and her false wheel,
That noon estaat assureth to be weel.	Who assures no estate (will continue) to be well.
And certes, lord, to abyden youre presence,	And certainly, lord, to await your presence,
Heere in this temple of the goddesse Clemence	Here in this temple of the goddess Clemency
We han ben waitynge al this fourtenyght.	We have been waiting all this fortnight.
Now help us, lord, sith it is in thy myght.	Now help us, lord, since it is in thy power.
"I, wrecche, which that wepe and wayle thus,	"I, wretch, who weep and wail thus,
Was whilom wyf to kyng Cappaneus,	Was once wife to king Cappaneus,
That starf at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --	Who died at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --
And alle we that been in this array	And all of us who are in this condition
And maken al this lamentacioun,	And make all this lamentation,
We losten alle oure housbondes at that toun,	We lost all our husbands at that town,
Whil that the seege theraboute lay.	While the siege lay around it.
And yet now the olde Creon -- weylaway! --	And yet now the old Creon -- woe oh woe! --
That lord is now of Thebes the citee,	Who is now lord of the city of Thebes,
Fulfild of ire and of iniquitee,	Filled with anger and with iniquity,
He, for despit and for his tirannye,	He, for spite and for his tyranny,
To do the dede bodyes vileynye	To do dishonor to the dead bodies
Of alle oure lordes whiche that been yslawe,	Of all our lords who are slain,
Hath alle the bodyes on an heep ydrawe,	Has dragged all the bodies in a heap,
And wol nat suffren hem, by noon assent,	And will not allow them, not at all,
Neither to been yburyed nor ybrent,	Neither to be buried nor burned,
But maketh houndes ete them in despit."	But makes hounds eat them as an insult."
And with that word, withouten moore respit,	And with that word, without more delay,
They fillen gruf and criden pitously,	They fell face down and cried piteously,
"Have on us wrecched wommen som mercy,	"Have some mercy on us wretched women,
And lat oure sorwe synken in thyn herte."	And let our sorrow sink in thy heart."
This gentil duc doun from his courser sterte	This gentle duke leaped down from his war horse
With herte pitous, whan he herde them speke.	With compassionate heart, when he heard them speak.
Hym thoughte that his herte wolde breke,	It seemed to him that his heart would break,
Whan he saugh hem so pitous and so maat,	When he saw them so pitiful and so dejected,
That whilom weren of so greet estaat;	That once were of such high rank;
And in his armes he hem alle up hente,	And in his arms he caught up them all,
And hem conforteth in ful good entente,	And comforts them with very good will,
And swoor his ooth, as he was trewe knyght,	And swore his oath, as he was true knight,
He wolde doon so ferforthly his myght	(That) he would do his might so completely
Upon the tiraunt Creon hem to wreke	To avenge them upon the tyrant Creon
That al the peple of Grece sholde speke	That all the people of Greece should speak (about)
How Creon was of Theseus yserved	How Creon was treated by Theseus
As he that hadde his deeth ful wel deserved.	As one who had very well deserved his death.
And right anoon, withouten moore abood,	And right away, without more delay,
His baner he desplayeth, and forth rood	He displays his banner, and rode forth
To Thebes-ward, and al his hoost biside.	Toward Thebes, and all his army beside (him).
No neer Atthenes wolde he go ne ride,	He would not walk nor ride any nearer to Athens,
Ne take his ese fully half a day,	Nor take his ease fully half a day,
But onward on his wey that nyght he lay,	But that night he lay (camped) on his way,
And sente anon Ypolita the queene,	And sent straightway Ypolita the queen,
And Emelye, hir yonge suster sheene,	And Emelye, her beautiful young sister,
Unto the toun of Atthenes to dwelle,	Unto the town of Athens to dwell,
And forth he rit; ther is namoore to telle.	And forth he rides; there is no more to tell.
The rede statue of Mars, with spere and targe,	The red statue of Mars, with spear and shield,
So shyneth in his white baner large	So shines in his large white banner
That alle the feeldes glyteren up and doun;	That all the fields glitter all around;
And by his baner born is his penoun	And by his banner is carried his pennon
Of gold ful riche, in which ther was ybete	Of very rich gold, in which there was embroidered
The Mynotaur, which that he wan in Crete.	The Minotaur, which he defeated in Crete.
Thus rit this duc, thus rit this conquerour,	Thus rides this duke, thus rides this conqueror,
And in his hoost of chivalrie the flour,	And in his army the flower of chivalry,
Til that he cam to Thebes and alighte	Until he came to Thebes and dismounted
Faire in a feeld, ther as he thoughte to fighte.	Graciously in a field, where he intended to fight.
But shortly for to speken of this thyng,	But briefly to speak of this thing,
With Creon, which that was of Thebes kyng,	With Creon, who was king of Thebes,
He faught, and slough hym manly as a knyght	He fought, and slew him boldly as a knight
In pleyn bataille, and putte the folk to flyght;	In open battle, and put the army to flight;
And by assaut he wan the citee after,	And by assault he won the city afterwards,
And rente adoun bothe wall and sparre and rafter;	And tore down both wall and beam and rafter;
And to the ladyes he restored agayn	And he gave back to the ladies
The bones of hir freendes that were slayn,	The bones of their husbands who were slain,
To doon obsequies, as was tho the gyse.	To do obsequies, as was then the custom.
But it were al to longe for to devyse	But it would be all too long to describe
The grete clamour and the waymentynge	The great clamor and the lamentation
That the ladyes made at the brennynge	That the ladies made at the burning
Of the bodies, and the grete honour	Of the bodies, and the great honor
That Theseus, the noble conquerour,	That Theseus, the noble conqueror,
Dooth to the ladyes, whan they from hym wente;	Does to the ladies, when they went from him;
But shortly for to telle is myn entente.	But briefly to tell is my intent.
Whan that this worthy duc, this Theseus,	When this worthy duke, this Theseus,
Hath Creon slayn and wonne Thebes thus,	Has slain Creon and thus won Thebes,
Stille in that feeld he took al nyght his reste,	Still in that field he took all night his rest,
And dide with al the contree as hym leste.	And did with all the country as he pleased.
To ransake in the taas of bodyes dede,	To search in the heap of dead bodies,
Hem for to strepe of harneys and of wede,	To strip them of armor and of clothing,
The pilours diden bisynesse and cure	The scavengers took great pains and worked hard
After the bataille and disconfiture.	After the battle and defeat.
And so bifel that in the taas they founde,	And (it) so befell that in the heap they found,
Thurgh-girt with many a grevous blody wounde,	Pierced through with many a grievous bloody wound,
Two yonge knyghtes liggynge by and by,	Two young knights lying side by side,
Bothe in oon armes, wroght ful richely,	Both with the same coat of arms, very richly wrought,
Of whiche two Arcita highte that oon,	Of which two one was called Arcite,
And that oother knyght highte Palamon.	And that other knight was called Palamon.
Nat fully quyke, ne fully dede they were,	They were not fully alive, nor fully dead,
But by hir cote-armures and by hir gere	But by their coats of arms and by their equipment
The heraudes knewe hem best in special	The heralds best knew them in particular
As they that weren of the blood roial	As they that were of the royal blood
Of Thebes, and of sustren two yborn.	Of Thebes, and born of two sisters.
Out of the taas the pilours han hem torn,	The scavengers have pulled them out of the heap,
And han hem caried softe unto the tente	And have carried them softy unto the tent
Of Theseus; and he ful soone hem sente	Of Theseus; and he very soon sent them
To Atthenes, to dwellen in prisoun	To Athens, to dwell in prison
Perpetuelly -- he nolde no raunsoun.	Perpetually -- he would not (accept) any ransom.
And whan this worthy duc hath thus ydon,	And when this worthy duke has thus done,
He took his hoost, and hoom he rit anon	He took his army, and home he rides straightway
With laurer crowned as a conquerour;	As a conqueror crowned with laurel;
And ther he lyveth in joye and in honour	And there he lives in joy and in honor
Terme of his lyf; what nedeth wordes mo?	For the duration of his life; what more words are needed?
And in a tour, in angwissh and in wo,	And in a tower, in anguish and in woe,
This Palamon and his felawe Arcite	This Palamon and his fellow Arcite
For everemoore; ther may no gold hem quite.	For evermore (remain); no gold can ransom them.
This passeth yeer by yeer and day by day,	This passes year by year and day by day,
Till it fil ones, in a morwe of May,	Until it befell once, in a morning of May,
That Emelye, that fairer was to sene	That Emelye, who was fairer to be seen
Than is the lylie upon his stalke grene,	Than is the lily upon its green stalk,
And fressher than the May with floures newe --	And fresher than the May with new flowers --
For with the rose colour stroof hire hewe,	For her hue vied with color of the rose,
I noot which was the fyner of hem two --	I do not know which was the finer of them two --
Er it were day, as was hir wone to do,	Before it was day, as was her custom to do,
She was arisen and al redy dight,	She was arisen and all ready prepared,
For May wole have no slogardie anyght.	For May will have no laziness at night.
The sesoun priketh every gentil herte,	The season urges on every gentle heart,
And maketh it out of his slep to sterte,	And makes it out of its sleep to awake suddenly,
And seith "Arys, and do thyn observaunce."	And says "Arise, and do thy observance."
This maked Emelye have remembraunce	This made Emelye remember
To doon honour to May, and for to ryse.	To do honor to May, and to rise.
Yclothed was she fressh, for to devyse:	She was gaily clothed, so to say:
Hir yelow heer was broyded in a tresse	Her yellow hair was braided in a tress
Bihynde hir bak, a yerde long, I gesse.	Behind her back, a yard long, I guess.
And in the gardyn, at the sonne upriste,	And in the garden, at the rising of the sun,
She walketh up and doun, and as hire liste	She walks up and down, and as she pleases
She gadereth floures, party white and rede,	She gathers flowers, mixed white and red,
To make a subtil gerland for hire hede;	To make an intricate garland for her head;
And as an aungel hevenysshly she soong.	And she sang (as) heavenly as an angel.
The grete tour, that was so thikke and stroong,	The great tower, that was so thick and strong,
Which of the castel was the chief dongeoun	Which was the main fortification of the castle
(Ther as the knyghtes weren in prisoun	(Where the knights were in prison
Of which I tolde yow and tellen shal),	Of which I told yow and shall tell),
Was evene joynant to the gardyn wal	Was just next to the garden wall
Ther as this Emelye hadde hir pleyynge.	Where this Emelye took her pleasure.
Bright was the sonne and cleer that morwenynge,	The sun was bright and clear that morning,
And Palamoun, this woful prisoner,	And Palamon, this woeful prisoner,
As was his wone, by leve of his gayler,	As was his custom, by permission of his jailer,
Was risen and romed in a chambre an heigh,	Had risen and roamed in a chamber on high,
In which he al the noble citee seigh,	In which he saw all the noble city,
And eek the gardyn, ful of braunches grene,	And also the garden, full of green branches,
Ther as this fresshe Emelye the shene	Where this fresh Emelye the bright
Was in hire walk, and romed up and doun.	Was in her walk, and roamed up and down.
This sorweful prisoner, this Palamoun,	This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon,
Goth in the chambre romynge to and fro	Goes in the chamber roaming to and fro
And to hymself compleynynge of his wo.	And to himself lamenting his woe.
That he was born, ful ofte he seyde, "allas!"	That he was born, full often he said, "alas!"
And so bifel, by aventure or cas,	And so it happened, by chance or accident,
That thurgh a wyndow, thikke of many a barre	That through a window, thickly set with many a bar
Of iren greet and square as any sparre,	Of iron, great and square as any beam,
He cast his eye upon Emelya,	He cast his eye upon Emelye,
And therwithal he bleynte and cride, "A!"	And with that he turned pale and cried, "A!"
As though he stongen were unto the herte.	As though he were stabbed unto the heart.
And with that cry Arcite anon up sterte	And with that cry Arcite immediately leaped up
And seyde, "Cosyn myn, what eyleth thee,	And said, "My cousin, what ails thee,
That art so pale and deedly on to see?	Who art so pale and deadly to look upon?
Why cridestow? Who hath thee doon offence?	Why didst thou cry out? Who has done thee offence?
For Goddes love, taak al in pacience	For the love of God, take all in patience
Oure prisoun, for it may noon oother be.	Our imprisonment, for it may not be otherwise.
Fortune hath yeven us this adversitee.	Fortune has given us this adversity.
Som wikke aspect or disposicioun	Some wicked aspect or disposition
Of Saturne, by som constellacioun,	Of Saturn, by some arrangement of the heavenly bodies,
Hath yeven us this, although we hadde it sworn;	Has given us this, although we had sworn it would not be;
So stood the hevene whan that we were born.	So stood the heavens when we were born.
We moste endure it; this is the short and playn."	We must endure it; this is the short and plain."
This Palamon answerde and seyde agayn,	This Palamon answered and said in reply,
"Cosyn, for sothe, of this opinioun	"Cousin, truly, concerning this opinion
Thow hast a veyn ymaginacioun.	Thou hast a foolish conception.
This prison caused me nat for to crye,	This prison did not cause me to cry out,
But I was hurt right now thurghout myn ye	But I was hurt right now through my eye
Into myn herte, that wol my bane be.	Into my heart, so that it will be the death of me.
The fairnesse of that lady that I see	The fairness of that lady whom I see
Yond in the gardyn romen to and fro	Yonder in the garden roaming to and fro
Is cause of al my criyng and my wo.	Is cause of all my crying and my woe.
I noot wher she be womman or goddesse,	I know not whether she is woman or goddess,
But Venus is it soothly, as I gesse."	But truly it is Venus, as I suppose."
And therwithal on knees doun he fil,	And with that he fell down on his knees,
And seyde, "Venus, if it be thy wil	And said, "Venus, if it be thy will
Yow in this gardyn thus to transfigure	Thus to transfigure yourself in this garden
Bifore me, sorweful, wrecched creature,	Before me, sorrowful, wretched creature,
Out of this prisoun help that we may scapen.	Help that we may escape out of this prison.
And if so be my destynee be shapen	And if it be so that my destiny is shaped
By eterne word to dyen in prisoun,	By eternal decree to die in prison,
Of oure lynage have som compassioun,	Have some compassion on our (noble) lineage
That is so lowe ybroght by tirannye."	Which is brought so low by tyranny."
And with that word Arcite gan espye	And with that word Arcite did see
Wher as this lady romed to and fro,	Where this lady roamed to and fro,
And with that sighte hir beautee hurte hym so,	And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,
That, if that Palamon was wounded sore,	That, if Palamon was sorely wounded,
Arcite is hurt as muche as he, or moore.	Arcite is hurt as much as he, or more.
And with a sigh he seyde pitously,	And with a sigh he said piteously,
"The fresshe beautee sleeth me sodeynly	"The fresh beauty slays me suddenly
Of hire that rometh in the yonder place;	Of her who roams in the yonder place;
And but I have hir mercy and hir grace,	And unless I have her mercy and her grace,
That I may seen hire atte leeste weye,	So that I can at least see her,
I nam but deed; ther nis namoore to seye."	I am as good as dead; there is no more to say."
This Palamon, whan he tho wordes herde,	This Palamon, when he heard those words,
Dispitously he looked and answerde,	Angrily he looked and answered,
"Wheither seistow this in ernest or in pley?"	"Sayest thou this in earnest or in play?"
"Nay," quod Arcite, "in ernest, by my fey!	"Nay," said Arcite, "in earnest, by my faith!
God helpe me so, me list ful yvele pleye."	So help me God, I have no desire to play."
This Palamon gan knytte his browes tweye.	This Palamon did knit his two brows.
"It nere," quod he, "to thee no greet honour	"It would not be," said he, "any great honor to thee
For to be fals, ne for to be traitour	To be false, nor to be traitor
To me, that am thy cosyn and thy brother	To me, who am thy cousin and thy brother
Ysworn ful depe, and ech of us til oother,	Sworn very sincerely, and each of us to the other,
That nevere, for to dyen in the peyne,	That never, though we had to die by torture,
Til that the deeth departe shal us tweyne,	Until death shall part us two,
Neither of us in love to hyndre oother,	Neither of us in love (is) to hinder the other,
Ne in noon oother cas, my leeve brother,	Nor in any other case, my dear brother,
But that thou sholdest trewely forthren me	But rather thou shouldest truly help me
In every cas, as I shal forthren thee --	In every case, as I shall help thee --
This was thyn ooth, and myn also, certeyn;	This was thy oath, and mine also, certainly;
I woot right wel, thou darst it nat withseyn.	I know right well, thou darest not deny it.
Thus artow of my conseil, out of doute,	Thus thou art my trusted confidant, without doubt,
And now thow woldest falsly been aboute	And now thou wouldest falsely be busy preparing
To love my lady, whom I love and serve,	To love my lady, whom I love and serve,
And evere shal til that myn herte sterve.	And ever shall until my heart dies.
Nay, certes, false Arcite, thow shalt nat so.	Nay, certainly, false Arcite, thou shalt not (do) so.
I loved hire first, and tolde thee my wo	I loved hire first, and told thee my woe
As to my conseil and my brother sworn	As to my confidant and my sworn brother
To forthre me, as I have toold biforn.	To further me, as I have told before.
For which thou art ybounden as a knyght	For which thou art bound as a knight
To helpen me, if it lay in thy myght,	To help me, if it lay in thy power,
Or elles artow fals, I dar wel seyn."	Or else thou art false, I dare well say."
This Arcite ful proudly spak ageyn:	This Arcite full proudly spoke in return:
"Thow shalt," quod he, "be rather fals than I;	"Thou shalt," said he, "be rather false than I;
And thou art fals, I telle thee outrely,	And thou art false, I tell thee flatly,
For paramour I loved hire first er thow.	As a mistress I loved her first before thou.
What wiltow seyen? Thou woost nat yet now	What wilt thou say? Thou knowest not yet now
Wheither she be a womman or goddesse!	Whether she is a woman or goddess!
Thyn is affeccioun of hoolynesse,	Thine is a feeling of holiness,
And myn is love as to a creature;	And mine is love as to a creature;
For which I tolde thee myn aventure	For which I told thee my circumstance
As to my cosyn and my brother sworn.	As to my cousin and my sworn brother.
I pose that thow lovedest hire biforn;	I posit (this assumption): that thou lovedest her first;
Wostow nat wel the olde clerkes sawe,	Knowest thou not well the old clerks' saying,
That `who shal yeve a lovere any lawe?'	That `who shall give a lover any law?'
Love is a gretter lawe, by my pan,	Love is a greater law, by my skull,
Than may be yeve to any erthely man;	Than may be given to any earthly man;
And therfore positif lawe and swich decree	And therefore positive (man-made) law and such decree
Is broken al day for love in ech degree.	Is broken every day for love in every way.
A man moot nedes love, maugree his heed;	A man must of necessity love, in spite of all he can do;
He may nat fleen it, thogh he sholde be deed,	He can not flee (from) it, though he should be dead,
Al be she mayde, or wydwe, or elles wyf.	Whether she be maid, or widow, or else wife.
And eek it is nat likly al thy lyf	And also it is not likely all thy life
To stonden in hir grace; namoore shal I;	To stand in her good graces; no more shall I;
For wel thou woost thyselven, verraily,	For well thou thyself knowest, truly,
That thou and I be dampned to prisoun	That thou and I are condemned to prison
Perpetuelly; us gayneth no raunsoun.	Perpetually; no ransom can help us.
We stryve as dide the houndes for the boon;	We strive as the hounds did for the bone;
They foughte al day, and yet hir part was noon.	They fought all day, and yet their share was nothing.
Ther cam a kyte, whil that they were so wrothe,	There came a kite, while they were so angry,
And baar awey the boon bitwixe hem bothe.	And carried away the bone between them both.
And therfore, at the kynges court, my brother,	And therefore, at the king's court, my brother,
Ech man for hymself, ther is noon oother.	Each man for himself, there is no other (way).
Love, if thee list, for I love and ay shal;	Love, if it please thee, for I love and always shall;
And soothly, leeve brother, this is al.	And truly, dear brother, this is all.
Heere in this prisoun moote we endure,	Here in this prison we must endure,
And everich of us take his aventure."	And each one of us take his chance."
Greet was the strif and long bitwix hem tweye,	Great and long was the strife between them two,
If that I hadde leyser for to seye;	If I had leisure to tell (it);
But to th'effect. It happed on a day,	But to the point. It happened on a day,
To telle it yow as shortly as I may,	To tell it to you as briefly as I can,
A worthy duc that highte Perotheus,	A worthy duke that was called Perotheus,
That felawe was unto duc Theseus	Who was a friend to duke Theseus
Syn thilke day that they were children lite,	Since that same time that they were little children,
Was come to Atthenes his felawe to visite,	Had come to Athens to visit his friend,
And for to pleye as he was wont to do;	And to amuse himself as he was accustomed to do;
For in this world he loved no man so,	For in this world he loved no man so (much),
And he loved hym als tendrely agayn.	And he (Theseus) loved him as tenderly in turn.
So wel they lovede, as olde bookes sayn,	So well they loved, as old books say,
That whan that oon was deed, soothly to telle,	That when one was dead, truly to tell,
His felawe wente and soughte hym doun in helle --	His friend went and sought him down in hell --
But of that storie list me nat to write.	But of that story I do not desire to write.
Duc Perotheus loved wel Arcite,	Duke Perotheus loved well Arcite,
And hadde hym knowe at Thebes yeer by yere,	And had known him at Thebes year after year,
And finally at requeste and preyere	And finally at request and prayer
Of Perotheus, withouten any raunsoun,	Of Perotheus, without any ransom,
Duc Theseus hym leet out of prisoun	Duke Theseus let him out of prison
Frely to goon wher that hym liste over al,	Freely to go all over, wherever he wishes,
In swich a gyse as I you tellen shal.	In such a manner as shall I tell you.
This was the forward, pleynly for t'endite,	This was the agreement, plainly to write,
Bitwixen Theseus and hym Arcite:	Between Theseus and this Arcite:
That if so were that Arcite were yfounde	That if it so were that Arcite were found
Evere in his lif, by day or nyght, oo stounde	Ever in his life, by day or night, at any moment
In any contree of this Theseus,	In any country of this Theseus,
And he were caught, it was acorded thus,	And if he were caught, it was agreed thus,
That with a swerd he sholde lese his heed.	That with a sword he should lose his head.
Ther nas noon oother remedie ne reed;	There was no other remedy nor course of action;
But taketh his leve, and homward he him spedde.	But (he) takes his leave, and homeward he sped.
Lat hym be war! His nekke lith to wedde.	Let him be ware! His neck lies as a pledge.
How greet a sorwe suffreth now Arcite!	How great a sorrow now suffers Arcite!
The deeth he feeleth thurgh his herte smyte;	He feels the death smite through his heart;
He wepeth, wayleth, crieth pitously;	He weeps, wails, cries piteously;
To sleen hymself he waiteth prively.	To slay himself he secretly awaits (an opportunity).
He seyde, "Allas that day that I was born!	He said, "Alas that day that I was born!
Now is my prisoun worse than biforn;	Now my prison is worse than before;
Now is me shape eternally to dwelle	Now I am destined eternally to dwell
Noght in purgatorie, but in helle.	Not in purgatory, but in hell.
Allas, that evere knew I Perotheus!	Alas, that ever I knew Perotheus!
For elles hadde I dwelled with Theseus,	For else I would have remained with Theseus,
Yfetered in his prisoun everemo.	Fettered in his prison evermore.
Thanne hadde I been in blisse and nat in wo.	Then would I have been in bliss and not in woe.
Oonly the sighte of hire whom that I serve,	Only the sight of her whom I serve,
Though that I nevere hir grace may deserve,	Though I never can deserve her grace,
Wolde han suffised right ynough for me.	Would have sufficed right enough for me.
O deere cosyn Palamon," quod he,	O dear cousin Palamon," said he,
"Thyn is the victorie of this aventure.	"The victory of this adventure is thine.
Ful blisfully in prison maistow dure --	Very blissfully in prison thou can remain --
In prison? Certes nay, but in paradys!	In prison? Certainly not, but in paradise!
Wel hath Fortune yturned thee the dys,	Well has Fortune turned the dice for thee,
That hast the sighte of hire, and I th'absence.	That hast the sight of her, and I the absence.
For possible is, syn thou hast hire presence,	For it is possible, since thou hast her presence,
And art a knyght, a worthy and an able,	And art a knight, a worthy and an able (one),
That by som cas, syn Fortune is chaungeable,	That by some chance, since Fortune is changeable,
Thow maist to thy desir somtyme atteyne.	Thou mayest sometime attain thy desire.
But I, that am exiled and bareyne	But I, who am exiled and barren
Of alle grace, and in so greet dispeir	Of all grace, and in so great despair
That ther nys erthe, water, fir, ne eir,	That there is not earth, water, fire, nor air,
Ne creature that of hem maked is,	Nor creature that is made of them,
That may me helpe or doon confort in this,	That can help me or do comfort (to me) in this,
Wel oughte I sterve in wanhope and distresse.	Well ought I to die in despair and distress.
Farwel my lif, my lust, and my gladnesse!	Farwell my life, my desire, and my gladness!
"Allas, why pleynen folk so in commune	"Alas, why do folk so commonly complain
On purveiaunce of God, or of Fortune,	About the providence of God, or of Fortune,
That yeveth hem ful ofte in many a gyse	That gives them full often in many a manner
Wel bettre than they kan hemself devyse?	Much better than they can themselves imagine?
Som man desireth for to han richesse,	One man desires to have riches,
That cause is of his mordre or greet siknesse;	Which is the cause of his murder or great sickness;
And som man wolde out of his prisoun fayn,	And one man would happily (go) out of his prison,
That in his hous is of his meynee slayn.	Who is slain in his house by members of his household.
Infinite harmes been in this mateere.	Infinite harms are in this matter.
We witen nat what thing we preyen heere;	We know not what thing we pray for here;
We faren as he that dronke is as a mous.	We act like one who is drunk as a mouse.
A dronke man woot wel he hath an hous,	A drunk man knows well he has a house,
But he noot which the righte wey is thider,	But he does not know which is the right way to it,
And to a dronke man the wey is slider.	And to a drunk man the way is slippery.
And certes, in this world so faren we;	And certainly, so we fare in this world;
We seken faste after felicitee,	We seek eagerly after felicity,
But we goon wrong ful often, trewely.	But we go wrong very often, truly.
Thus may we seyen alle, and namely I,	Thus can we all say, and especially I,
That wende and hadde a greet opinioun	Who supposed and had a firm belief
That if I myghte escapen from prisoun,	That if I might escape from prison,
Thanne hadde I been in joye and parfit heele,	Then I would have been in joy and perfect well-being,
Ther now I am exiled fro my wele.	Whereas now I am exiled from my source of happiness.
Syn that I may nat seen you, Emelye,	Since I can not see you, Emelye,
I nam but deed; ther nys no remedye."	I am as good as dead; there is not any remedy."
Upon that oother syde Palamon,	Upon that other side Palamon,
Whan that he wiste Arcite was agon,	When he knew Arcite was gone,
Swich sorwe he maketh that the grete tour	He makes such sorrow that the great tour
Resouneth of his youlyng and clamour.	Resounds with his yowling and clamor.
The pure fettres on his shynes grete	The great fetters themselves on his shins
Weren of his bittre, salte teeres wete.	Were wet from his bitter, salt tears.
"Allas," quod he, "Arcita, cosyn myn,	"Alas," said he, "Arcite, cousin mine,
Of al oure strif, God woot, the fruyt is thyn.	Of all our strife, God knows, the profit is thine.
Thow walkest now in Thebes at thy large,	Thou walkest freely now in Thebes,
And of my wo thow yevest litel charge.	And thou care little about my woe.
Thou mayst, syn thou hast wisdom and manhede,	Thou mayest, since thou hast wisdom and manhood,
Assemblen alle the folk of oure kynrede,	Assemble all the folk of our family,
And make a werre so sharp on this citee	And make a war so sharp on this city
That by som aventure or some tretee	That by some chance or some treaty
Thow mayst have hire to lady and to wyf	Thou mayest have her as lady and as wife
For whom that I moste nedes lese my lyf.	For whom I must of necessity lose my life.
For, as by wey of possibilitee,	For, as by way of possibility,
Sith thou art at thy large, of prisoun free,	Since thou art at thy liberty, free of prison,
And art a lord, greet is thyn avauntage	And art a lord, thy advantage is great,
Moore than is myn, that sterve here in a cage.	More than is mine, who die here in a cage.
For I moot wepe and wayle, whil I lyve,	For I must weep and wail, while I live,
With al the wo that prison may me yive,	With all the woe that prison may give me,
And eek with peyne that love me yeveth also,	And also with pain that love gives me also,
That doubleth al my torment and my wo."	That doubles all my torment and my woe."
Therwith the fyr of jalousie up sterte	With that the fire of jealousy started up
Withinne his brest, and hente him by the herte	Within his breast, and seized him by the heart
So woodly that he lyk was to biholde	So madly that he was to look upon like
The boxtree or the asshen dede and colde.	The box tree or the ash dead and cold.
Thanne seyde he, "O crueel goddes that governe	Then said he, "O cruel gods that govern
This world with byndyng of youre word eterne,	This world with binding of your eternal word,
And writen in the table of atthamaunt	And write in the table of adamant (hardest of stones)
Youre parlement and youre eterne graunt,	Your decision and your eternal decree,
What is mankynde moore unto you holde	Why is mankind more obligated unto you
Than is the sheep that rouketh in the folde?	Than is the sheep that cowers in the sheepfold?
For slayn is man right as another beest,	For man is slain exactly like another beast,
And dwelleth eek in prison and arreest,	And dwells also in prison and detention,
And hath siknesse and greet adversitee,	And has sickness and great adversity,
And ofte tymes giltelees, pardee.	And often times guiltless, indeed.
"What governance is in this prescience,	"What (sort of) governance is in this foreknowledge,
That giltelees tormenteth innocence?	That torments guiltless innocence?
And yet encresseth this al my penaunce,	And yet this increases all my suffering,
That man is bounden to his observaunce,	That man is bound to his duty,
For Goddes sake, to letten of his wille,	For God's sake, to refrain from his desire,
Ther as a beest may al his lust fulfille.	Whereas a beast may fulfill all his desire.
And whan a beest is deed he hath no peyne;	And when a beast is dead he has no pain;
But man after his deeth moot wepe and pleyne,	But man after his death must weep and lament,
Though in this world he have care and wo.	Though in this world he may have (had) care and woe.
Withouten doute it may stonden so.	Without doubt such is the case.
The answere of this lete I to dyvynys,	The answer to this I leave to theologians,
But wel I woot that in this world greet pyne ys.	But well I know that great pain is in this world.
Allas, I se a serpent or a theef,	Alas, I see a serpent or a thief,
That many a trewe man hath doon mescheef,	That has done mischief to many a true man,
Goon at his large, and where hym list may turne.	Go at his liberty, and can go where he pleases.
But I moot been in prisoun thurgh Saturne,	But I must be in prison because of Saturn,
And eek thurgh Juno, jalous and eek wood,	And also because of Juno, jealous and also mad,
That hath destroyed wel ny al the blood	Who has destroyed well nigh all the blood
Of Thebes with his waste walles wyde;	Of Thebes with its wide devastated walls;
And Venus sleeth me on that oother syde	And Venus slays me on that other side
For jalousie and fere of hym Arcite."	For jealousy and fear of this Arcite."
Now wol I stynte of Palamon a lite,	Now will I cease (speaking of) of Palamon for a little while,
And lete hym in his prisoun stille dwelle,	And leave him to dwell in his prison still,
And of Arcita forth I wol yow telle.	And of Arcite forth I will tell you.
The somer passeth, and the nyghtes longe	The summer passes, and the long nights
Encressen double wise the peynes stronge	Increase doubly the strong pains
Bothe of the lovere and the prisoner.	Both of the lover and the prisoner.
I noot which hath the wofuller mester.	I know not which has the more woeful task.
For, shortly for to seyn, this Palamoun	For, briefly to say (it), this Palamon
Perpetuelly is dampned to prisoun,	Is damned perpetually to prison,
In cheynes and in fettres to been deed;	In chains and in fetters to be dead;
And Arcite is exiled upon his heed	And Arcite is exiled on threat of losing his head
For everemo, as out of that contree,	For evermore, out of that country,
Ne nevere mo ne shal his lady see.	Nor nevermore shall see his lady.
Yow loveres axe I now this questioun:	Yow lovers now I ask this question:
Who hath the worse, Arcite or Palamoun?	Who has the worse, Arcite or Palamon?
That oon may seen his lady day by day,	That one may see his lady every day,
But in prison he moot dwelle alway;	But in prison he must always dwell;
That oother wher hym list may ride or go,	That other where he pleases may ride or walk,
But seen his lady shal he nevere mo.	But he shall see his lady nevermore.
Now demeth as yow liste, ye that kan,	Now judge as it pleases you, you who know (of such things),
For I wol telle forth as I bigan.	For I will tell forth as I began.
Whan that Arcite to Thebes comen was,	When Arcite was come to Thebes,
Ful ofte a day he swelte and seyde "Allas!"	Very often each day he grew faint and said "Alas!"
For seen his lady shal he nevere mo.	For he shall never more see his lady.
And shortly to concluden al his wo,	And shortly to conclude (telling) all his woe,
So muche sorwe hadde nevere creature	So much sorrow never had creature
That is, or shal, whil that the world may dure.	That is, or shall (be), while the world may endure.
His slep, his mete, his drynke, is hym biraft,	He is bereft of his sleep, his food, his drink
That lene he wex and drye as is a shaft;	So that he became lean and dry as is a stick;
His eyen holwe and grisly to biholde,	His eyes sunken and grisly to behold,
His hewe falow and pale as asshen colde,	His hue sickly yellow and pale as cold ashes,
And solitarie he was and evere allone,	And he was solitary and ever alone,
And waillynge al the nyght, makynge his mone;	And wailing all the night, making his moan;
And if he herde song or instrument,	And if he heard song or instrument,
Thanne wolde he wepe, he myghte nat be stent.	Then would he weep, he could not be stopped.
So feble eek were his spiritz, and so lowe,	So feeble also were his spirits, and so low,
And chaunged so, that no man koude knowe	And changed so, that no man could know
His speche nor his voys, though men it herde.	His speech nor his voice, though men heard it.
And in his geere for al the world he ferde	And in his behavior for all the world he fared
Nat oonly lik the loveris maladye	Not only like the lover's malady
Of Hereos, but rather lyk manye,	Of Hereos, but rather like mania,
Engendred of humour malencolik	Engendered by the melancholic humor
Biforen, in his celle fantastik.	In the front lobe, in his imagination.
And shortly, turned was al up so doun	And shortly, all was turned topsy-turvy
Bothe habit and eek disposicioun	Both the physical condition and also the mental disposition
Of hym, this woful lovere daun Arcite.	Of him, this woeful lover dan Arcite.
What sholde I al day of his wo endite?	Why should I all daylong write of his woe?
Whan he endured hadde a yeer or two	When he had endured a year or two
This crueel torment and this peyne and wo,	This cruel torment and this pain and woe,
At Thebes, in his contree, as I seyde,	At Thebes, in his country, as I said,
Upon a nyght in sleep as he hym leyde,	Upon one night as he laid himself in sleep,
Hym thoughte how that the wynged god Mercurie	It seemed to him that the winged god Mercury
Biforn hym stood and bad hym to be murie.	Stood before him and commanded him to be merry.
His slepy yerde in hond he bar uprighte;	His sleep-inducing staff he carried upright in his hand;
An hat he werede upon his heris brighte.	He wore a hat upon his bright hair.
Arrayed was this god, as he took keep,	This god was dressed, as he (Arcite) noticed,
As he was whan that Argus took his sleep;	As he was when he put Argus to sleep;
And seyde hym thus: "To Atthenes shaltou wende,	And said to him thus: "To Athens shalt thou go,
Ther is thee shapen of thy wo an ende."	Where an end of thy woe is destined for thee."
And with that word Arcite wook and sterte.	And with that word Arcite awoke and leaped up.
"Now trewely, hou soore that me smerte,"	"Now truly, however sorely it may pain me,"
Quod he, "to Atthenes right now wol I fare,	Said he, "I will go to Athens right now,
Ne for the drede of deeth shal I nat spare	Nor shall I refrain for the dread of death
To se my lady, that I love and serve.	From seeing my lady, whom I love and serve.
In hire presence I recche nat to sterve."	In her presence I care not if I die."
And with that word he caughte a greet mirour,	And with that word he picked up a large mirror,
And saugh that chaunged was al his colour,	And saw that all his color was changed,
And saugh his visage al in another kynde.	And saw his visage all (changed) to another sort.
And right anon it ran hym in his mynde,	And right away it ran to him in his mind,
That, sith his face was so disfigured	That, since his face was so disfigured
Of maladye the which he hadde endured,	By the malady which he had endured,
He myghte wel, if that he bar hym lowe,	He might well, if he conducted himself humbly,
Lyve in Atthenes everemoore unknowe,	Live in Athens evermore unknown,
And seen his lady wel ny day by day.	And see his lady almost every day.
And right anon he chaunged his array,	And right away he changed his clothing,
And cladde hym as a povre laborer,	And clad himself as a poor laborer,
And al allone, save oonly a squier	And all alone, except only a squire
That knew his privetee and al his cas,	Who knew his private affairs and all his situation,
Which was disgised povrely as he was,	Who was disguised as poorly as he was,
To Atthenes is he goon the nexte way.	To Athens he is gone the nearest way.
And to the court he wente upon a day,	And to the court he went upon a day,
And at the gate he profreth his servyse	And at the gate he offers his service
To drugge and drawe, what so men wol devyse.	To drudge and draw water, whatever men will command.
And shortly of this matere for to seyn,	And shortly to speak of this matter,
He fil in office with a chamberleyn	He was given employment by a household attendant
The which that dwellynge was with Emelye,	Who was dwelling with Emelye,
For he was wys and koude soone espye,	For he was wise and could soon take the measure
Of every servaunt, which that serveth here.	Of every servant, who serves here.
Wel koude he hewen wode, and water bere,	He could well hew wood, and carry water,
For he was yong and myghty for the nones,	For he was young and mighty indeed,
And therto he was long and big of bones	And moreover he was tall and strong of bones
To doon that any wight kan hym devyse.	To do what any one can command him.
A yeer or two he was in this servyse,	A year or two he was in this service,
Page of the chambre of Emelye the brighte,	Page of the chamber of Emelye the bright,
And Philostrate he seyde that he highte.	And he said that he was called Philostrate.
But half so wel biloved a man as he	But half so well beloved a man as he
Ne was ther nevere in court of his degree;	Was never in court (anyone) of his rank;
He was so gentil of condicioun	He was so noble in manner
That thurghout al the court was his renoun.	That his fame was (spread) throughout all the court .
They seyden that it were a charitee	They said that it would be a act of charity
That Theseus wolde enhauncen his degree,	If Theseus would advance his rank,
And putten hym in worshipful servyse,	And put him in noble employment,
Ther as he myghte his vertu excercise.	Where he could exercise his abilities.
And thus withinne a while his name is spronge,	And thus within a short time his fame is sprung,
Bothe of his dedes and his goode tonge,	Both for his deeds and his good speech,
That Theseus hath taken hym so neer	That Theseus has taken him so near
That of his chambre he made hym a squier,	That he has made him a squire of his chamber,
And gaf hym gold to mayntene his degree.	And gave him gold to maintain (a life style suitable to) his rank.
And eek men broghte hym out of his contree,	And also men brought him out of his country,
From yeer to yeer, ful pryvely his rente;	From year to year, very secretly, his income;
But honestly and slyly he it spente,	But properly and slyly he spent it,
That no man wondred how that he it hadde.	So that no man wondered how he acquired it.
And thre yeer in this wise his lif he ladde,	And three years in this manner he led his life,
And bar hym so, in pees and eek in werre,	And conducted himself so that, in peace and also in war,
Ther was no man that Theseus hath derre.	There was no man whom Theseus holds dearer.
And in this blisse lete I now Arcite,	And in this bliss I now leave Arcite,
And speke I wole of Palamon a lite.	And I will speak of Palamon a little.
In derknesse and horrible and strong prisoun	In darkness and horrible and strong imprisonment
Thise seven yeer hath seten Palamoun	These seven years Palamon has sat
Forpyned, what for wo and for distresse.	Wasted by suffering, what for woe and for distress.
Who feeleth double soor and hevynesse	Who feels double pain and sadness
But Palamon, that love destreyneth so	But Palamon, whom love so afflicts
That wood out of his wit he goth for wo?	That he goes mad, out of his wits because of woe?
And eek therto he is a prisoner	And also moreover he is a prisoner
Perpetuelly, noght oonly for a yer.	Perpetually, not just for a year.
Who koude ryme in Englyssh proprely	Who could rime in English properly
His martirdom? For sothe it am nat I;	His martyrdom? In truth it is not I;
Therfore I passe as lightly as I may.	Therefore I pass on as quickly as I can.
It fel that in the seventhe yer, of May	It happened that in the seventh year, of May
The thridde nyght (as olde bookes seyn,	The third night (as old books say,
That al this storie tellen moore pleyn),	That tell all this story more fully),
Were it by aventure or destynee --	Whether it was by chance or fate --
As, whan a thyng is shapen, it shal be --	As, when a thing is pre-ordained, it must be --
That soone after the mydnyght Palamoun,	That soon after midnight Palamon,
By helpyng of a freend, brak his prisoun	With the help of a friend, broke out of his prison
And fleeth the citee faste as he may go.	And flees the city as fast as he can go.
For he hadde yeve his gayler drynke so	For he had so given his jailer drink
Of a clarree maad of a certeyn wyn,	Of a spiced and sweetened drink made of a certain wine,
With nercotikes and opie of Thebes fyn,	With narcotics and pure opium of Thebes,
That al that nyght, thogh that men wolde him shake,	That all that night, though men would shake him,
The gayler sleep; he myghte nat awake.	The jailer slept; he could not awake.
And thus he fleeth as faste as evere he may.	And thus he flees as fast as ever he can.
The nyght was short and faste by the day	The night was short and very close to the day
That nedes cost he moot hymselven hyde,	So that by necessity he must hide himself,
And til a grove faste ther bisyde	And to a grove close by
With dredeful foot thanne stalketh Palamon.	With fearful foot then stalks Palamon.
For, shortly, this was his opinion:	For, shortly, this was his idea:
That in that grove he wolde hym hyde al day,	That in that grove he would hide himself all day,
And in the nyght thanne wolde he take his way	And in the night then he would take his way
To Thebes-ward, his freendes for to preye	Toward Thebes, to pray his friends
On Theseus to helpe him to werreye;	To help him to wage war on Theseus;
And shortly, outher he wolde lese his lif	And shortly, he would either lose his life
Or wynnen Emelye unto his wyf.	Or win Emelye to be his wife.
This is th'effect and his entente pleyn.	This is the purpose and his full intent.
Now wol I turne to Arcite ageyn,	Now I will turn again to Arcite,
That litel wiste how ny that was his care,	That little knew how near his trouble was,
Til that Fortune had broght him in the snare.	To which Fortune had brought him in the snare.
The bisy larke, messager of day,	The busy lark, messenger of day,
Salueth in hir song the morwe gray,	Salutes the morning gray in her song,
And firy Phebus riseth up so bright	And fiery Phoebus rises up so bright
That al the orient laugheth of the light,	That all the orient laughs because of the light,
And with his stremes dryeth in the greves	And with his rays dries in the groves
The silver dropes hangynge on the leves.	The silver drops hanging on the leaves.
And Arcita, that in the court roial	And Arcite, who in the royal court
With Theseus is principal squier,	With Theseus is chief squire,
Is risen and looketh on the myrie day.	Is risen and looks on the merry day.
And for to doon his observaunce to May,	And to do his observance to May,
Remembrynge on the poynt of his desir,	Meditating on the object of his desire,
He on a courser, startlynge as the fir,	He on a war horse, leaping about like the fire,
Is riden into the feeldes hym to pleye,	Has ridden into the fields to amuse himself,
Out of the court, were it a myle or tweye.	Out of the court, about a mile or two.
And to the grove of which that I yow tolde	And to the grove of which I told you
By aventure his wey he gan to holde	By chance he began to hold his way
To maken hym a gerland of the greves,	To make himself a garland of the branches,
Were it of wodebynde or hawethorn leves,	Were it of woodbine or hawthorn leaves,
And loude he song ayeyn the sonne shene:	And loud he sang in the bright sun:
"May, with alle thy floures and thy grene,	"May, with all thy flowers and thy greenery,
Welcome be thou, faire, fresshe May,	Welcome be thou, fair, fresh May,
In hope that I som grene gete may."	In hope that I can get something green."
And from his courser, with a lusty herte,	And from his war horse, with an eager heart,
Into the grove ful hastily he sterte,	He rushed into the grove hastily,
And in a path he rometh up and doun,	And in a path he roams up and down,
Ther as by aventure this Palamoun	Where by chance this Palamon
Was in a bussh, that no man myghte hym se,	Was in a thicket, so that no man could see him,
For soore afered of his deeth was he.	For he was sorely afraid of his death.
No thyng ne knew he that it was Arcite;	In no way did he know that it was Arcite;
God woot he wolde have trowed it ful lite.	God knows he would scarcely have believed it
But sooth is seyd, go sithen many yeres,	But truly it is said, since many years ago,
That "feeld hath eyen and the wode hath eres."	That "field has eyes and the wood has ears."
It is ful fair a man to bere hym evene,	It is very good for a man to act calmly,
For al day meeteth men at unset stevene.	For every day people meet at unexpected times.
Ful litel woot Arcite of his felawe,	Arcite knows full little of his fellow,
That was so ny to herknen al his sawe,	Who was near enough to hear all his speech,
For in the bussh he sitteth now ful stille.	For in the thicket he sits now very still.
Whan that Arcite hadde romed al his fille,	When Arcite had roamed all his fill,
And songen al the roundel lustily,	And sung all the rondel cheerfully,
Into a studie he fil sodeynly,	He fell suddenly into a state of anxiety,
As doon thise loveres in hir queynte geres,	As these lovers do in their strange manners,
Now in the crope, now doun in the breres,	Now in the tree top, now down in the briars,
Now up, now doun, as boket in a welle.	Now up, now down, like a bucket in a well.
Right as the Friday, soothly for to telle,	Exactly like the Friday, truly for to tell,
Now it shyneth, now it reyneth faste,	Now it shines, now it rains hard,
Right so kan geery Venus overcaste	Just so can fickle Venus sadden
The hertes of hir folk; right as hir day	The hearts of her folk; just as her day
Is gereful, right so chaungeth she array.	Is changeable, just so she changes her array.
Selde is the Friday al the wowke ylike.	Friday is seldom like all the rest of the week.
Whan that Arcite had songe, he gan to sike	When Arcite had sung, he began to sigh
And sette hym doun withouten any moore.	And sat himself down without any more.
"Allas," quod he, "that day that I was bore!	"Alas," he said, "that day that I was born!
How longe, Juno, thurgh thy crueltee,	How long, Juno, through thy cruelty,
Woltow werreyen Thebes the citee?	Wilt thou make war on the city of Thebes?
Allas, ybroght is to confusioun	Alas, to ruin is brought
The blood roial of Cadme and Amphioun --	The royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion --
Of Cadmus, which that was the firste man	Of Cadmus, who was the first man
That Thebes bulte, or first the toun bigan,	Who built Thebes, before the town first began,
And of the citee first was crouned kyng.	And first was crowned king of the city.
Of his lynage am I and his ofspryng	I am of his lineage and his offspring
By verray ligne, as of the stok roial,	By true lineage, of the royal family,
And now I am so caytyf and so thral,	And now I am so wretched and so enslaved,
That he that is my mortal enemy,	That he who is my mortal enemy,
I serve hym as his squier povrely.	I meekly serve him as his squire.
And yet dooth Juno me wel moore shame,	And yet Juno does me much more shame,
For I dar noght biknowe myn owene name;	For I dare not acknowledge my own name;
But ther as I was wont to highte Arcite,	But whereas I was accustomed to be called Arcite,
Now highte I Philostrate, noght worth a myte.	Now I am called Philostrate, not worth a penny.
Allas, thou felle Mars! Allas, Juno!	Alas, thou fierce Mars! Alas, Juno!
Thus hath youre ire oure lynage al fordo,	Thus has your anger destroyed all our lineage,
Save oonly me and wrecched Palamoun,	Save only me and wretched Palamon,
That Theseus martireth in prisoun.	Whom Theseus torments in prison.
And over al this, to sleen me outrely	And in addition to all this, to slay me utterly
Love hath his firy dart so brennyngly	Love has his fiery dart so ardently
Ystiked thurgh my trewe, careful herte	Stabbed through my faithful, sorrowful heart
That shapen was my deeth erst than my sherte.	That my death was destined before my first garment was made.
Ye sleen me with youre eyen, Emelye!	You slay me with your eyes, Emelye!
Ye been the cause wherfore that I dye.	You are the cause by which I die.
Of al the remenant of myn oother care	Of all the rest of my other troubles
Ne sette I nat the montance of a tare,	I do not reckon at the value of a weed,
So that I koude doon aught to youre plesaunce."	Provided that I could do anything to please you."
And with that word he fil doun in a traunce	And with that word he fell down in a trance
A longe tyme, and after he up sterte.	A long time, and afterwards he leaped up.
This Palamoun, that thoughte that thurgh his herte	This Palamon, that thought that through his heart
He felte a coold swerd sodeynliche glyde,	He felt a cold sword suddenly glide,
For ire he quook; no lenger wolde he byde.	For anger he trembled; no longer would he wait.
And whan that he had herd Arcites tale,	And when he had heard Arcite's tale,
As he were wood, with face deed and pale,	As if he were mad, with face dead and pale,
He stirte hym up out of the buskes thikke	He leaped up out of the thick bushes
And seide: "Arcite, false traytour wikke,	And said: "Arcite, false, wicked traitor,
Now artow hent, that lovest my lady so,	Now art thou taken, who lovest my lady so,
For whom that I have al this peyne and wo,	For whom that I have all this pain and woe,
And art my blood, and to my conseil sworn,	And art of my blood, and sworn to be in my confidence,
As I ful ofte have told thee heerbiforn,	As I full often have told thee before now,
And hast byjaped heere duc Theseus,	And hast tricked here duke Theseus,
And falsly chaunged hast thy name thus!	And thus hast falsely changed thy name!
I wol be deed, or elles thou shalt dye.	I will be dead, or else thou shalt die.
Thou shalt nat love my lady Emelye,	Thou shalt not love my lady Emelye,
But I wol love hire oonly and namo;	But I will love her only and no other;
For I am Palamon, thy mortal foo.	For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.
And though that I no wepene have in this place,	And though I have no weapon in this place,
But out of prison am astert by grace,	But out of prison am escaped by good luck,
I drede noght that outher thow shalt dye,	I doubt not that either thou shalt dye,
Or thow ne shalt nat loven Emelye.	Either thou shalt not love Emelye,
Chees which thou wolt, or thou shalt nat asterte!"	Choose which thou wish, or thou shalt not escape!"
This Arcite, with ful despitous herte,	This Arcite, with full spiteful heart,
Whan he hym knew, and hadde his tale herd,	When he knew him, and had heard his tale,
As fiers as leon pulled out his swerd,	As fierce as a lion pulled out his sword,
And seyde thus: "By God that sit above,	And said thus: "By God who sits above,
Nere it that thou art sik and wood for love,	Were it not that thou art sick and mad for love,
And eek that thow no wepne hast in this place,	And also because thou hast no weapon in this place,
Thou sholdest nevere out of this grove pace,	Thou shouldest never walk out of this grove,
That thou ne sholdest dyen of myn hond.	Rather thou shouldest die of my hand.
For I defye the seurete and the bond	For I repudiate the pledge and the bond
Which that thou seist that I have maad to thee.	Which thou sayest that I have made to thee.
What! Verray fool, thynk wel that love is free,	Lo! True fool, think well that love is free,
And I wol love hire maugree al thy myght!	And I will love her in spite of all thy might!
But for as muche thou art a worthy knyght	But for as much as thou art a worthy knight
And wilnest to darreyne hire by bataille,	And desire to decide the right to her by battle,
Have heer my trouthe; tomorwe I wol nat faille,	Have here my pledge; tomorrow I will not fail,
Withoute wityng of any oother wight,	Without the knowledge of any other person,
That heere I wol be founden as a knyght,	But here I will be found as a knight,
And bryngen harneys right ynough for thee;	And bring armor right enough for thee;
And ches the beste, and leef the worste for me.	And choose the best, and leave the worst for me.
And mete and drynke this nyght wol I brynge	And food and drink this night will I bring
Ynough for thee, and clothes for thy beddynge.	Enough for thee, and bed-clothes for thy bedding.
And if so be that thou my lady wynne,	And if it so be that thou win my lady,
And sle me in this wode ther I am inne,	And slay me in this wood where I am in,
Thow mayst wel have thy lady as for me."	Thou mayest well have thy lady as far as I am concerned."
This Palamon answerde, "I graunte it thee."	This Palamon answered, "I agree."
And thus they been departed til amorwe,	And thus they are departed until morning,
Whan ech of hem had leyd his feith to borwe.	When each of them had laid his faith as a pledge.
O Cupide, out of alle charitee!	O Cupid, devoid of all kindness to others!
O regne, that wolt no felawe have with thee!	O reign, that will have no partner with thee!
Ful sooth is seyd that love ne lordshipe	Full truly it is said that love nor lordship
Wol noght, his thankes, have no felaweshipe.	Will not, willingly, have any partnership.
Wel fynden that Arcite and Palamoun.	Arcite and Palamon well find that (to be true).
Arcite is riden anon unto the toun,	Arcite has ridden immediately into the town,
And on the morwe, er it were dayes light,	And on the morning, before it was day's light,
Ful prively two harneys hath he dight,	Very secretly he has prepared two sets of armor,
Bothe suffisaunt and mete to darreyne	Both sufficient and suitable to decide
The bataille in the feeld bitwix hem tweyne;	The battle in the field between them two;
And on his hors, allone as he was born,	And on his horse, alone as he was born,
He carieth al the harneys hym biforn.	He carries all the armor before him.
And in the grove, at tyme and place yset,	And in the grove, at time and place set,
This Arcite and this Palamon ben met.	This Arcite and this Palamon are met.
To chaungen gan the colour in hir face;	The color in their faces began to change;
Right as the hunters in the regne of Trace,	Just as the hunters in the reign of Thrace,
That stondeth at the gappe with a spere,	He who stands at the gap in the forrest with a spear,
Whan hunted is the leon or the bere,	When the lion or the bear is hunted,
And hereth hym come russhyng in the greves,	And hears him come rushing in the bushes,
And breketh bothe bowes and the leves,	And breaks both boughs and the leaves,
And thynketh, "Heere cometh my mortal enemy!	And thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy!
Withoute faille, he moot be deed, or I,	Without fail, he must be dead, or I,
For outher I moot sleen hym at the gappe,	For either I must slay him at the gap,
Or he moot sleen me, if that me myshappe."	Or he must slay me, if I suffer misfortune."
So ferden they in chaungyng of hir hewe,	So fared they in changing colors of their faces,
As fer as everich of hem oother knewe.	When each of them knew the other.
Ther nas no good day, ne no saluyng,	There was no 'good day,' nor no salutations,
But streight, withouten word or rehersyng,	But straightway, without word or conversing,
Everich of hem heelp for to armen oother	Each one of them helped to arm the other
As freendly as he were his owene brother;	As friendly as if he were his own brother;
And after that, with sharpe speres stronge	And after that, with sharp strong spears
They foynen ech at oother wonder longe.	They thrust at each other a wonderfully long time.
Thou myghtest wene that this Palamon	Thou mightest suppose that this Palamon
In his fightyng were a wood leon,	In his fighting was a mad lion,
And as a crueel tigre was Arcite;	And Arcite was like a cruel tiger;
As wilde bores gonne they to smyte,	They began to smite like wild boars,
That frothen whit as foom for ire wood.	That froth at the mouth white as foam for mad anger.
Up to the ancle foghte they in hir blood.	They fought up to the ankle in their blood.
And in this wise I lete hem fightyng dwelle,	And in this manner I leave them to remain fighting,
And forth I wole of Theseus yow telle.	And forth I will tell you of Theseus.
The destinee, ministre general,	The destiny, general minister,
That executeth in the world over al	That executes in the world everywhere
The purveiaunce that God hath seyn biforn,	The providence that God has foreseen,
So strong it is that, though the world had sworn	So strong it is that, though the world had sworn
The contrarie of a thyng by ye or nay,	The contrary of a thing by yes or no,
Yet somtyme it shal fallen on a day	Yet sometimes it shall happen on one day
That falleth nat eft withinne a thousand yeer.	That happens not again in a thousand years.
For certeinly, oure appetites heer,	For certainly, our desires here,
Be it of werre, or pees, or hate, or love,	Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,
Al is this reuled by the sighte above.	All this is ruled by the foresight above.
This mene I now by myghty Theseus,	I mean this now in regard to mighty Theseus,
That for to hunten is so desirus,	Who is so desirous to hunt,
And namely at the grete hert in May,	And especially at the large hart in May,
That in his bed ther daweth hym no day	That in his bed there dawns for him no day
That he nys clad, and redy for to ryde	That he is not clad, and ready to ride
With hunte and horn and houndes hym bisyde.	With huntsman and horn and hounds beside him.
For in his huntyng hath he swich delit	For in his hunting he has such delight
That it is al his joye and appetit	That it is all his joy and desire
To been hymself the grete hertes bane,	To be himself the large hart's slayer,
For after Mars he serveth now Dyane.	For next to Mars he now serves Diana.
Cleer was the day, as I have toold er this,	The day was clear, as I have told before this,
And Theseus with alle joye and blis,	And Theseus with all joy and bliss,
With his Ypolita, the faire queene,	With his Ypolita, the faire queen,
And Emelye, clothed al in grene,	And Emelye, clothed all in green,
On huntyng be they riden roially.	On hunting they are ridden royally.
And to the grove that stood ful faste by,	And to the grove that stood very close by,
In which ther was an hert, as men hym tolde,	In which there was a hart, so people told him,
Duc Theseus the streighte wey hath holde.	Duke Theseus has held the straight way.
And to the launde he rideth hym ful right,	And directly to the glade he rides,
For thider was the hert wont have his flight,	For through there the hart was accustomed to take his escape,
And over a brook, and so forth on his weye.	And (flee) over a brook, and so forth on his way.
This duc wol han a cours at hym or tweye	This duke will have a run or two at him
With houndes swiche as that hym list comaunde.	With such hounds as he pleases to command.
And whan this duc was come unto the launde,	And when this duke was come unto the glade,
Under the sonne he looketh, and anon	He looks toward the sun, and immediately
He was war of Arcite and Palamon,	He was aware of Arcite and Palamon,
That foughten breme as it were bores two.	Who fought as fiercely as if it were two wild boars.
The brighte swerdes wenten to and fro	The bright swords went to and fro
So hidously that with the leeste strook	So hideously that with the weakest stroke
It semed as it wolde felle an ook.	It seemed as if it would fell an oak.
But what they were, no thyng he ne woot.	But who they were, he knew nothing.
This duc his courser with his spores smoot,	This duke smote his warhorse with his spurs,
And at a stert he was bitwix hem two,	And with a sudden leap he was between them two,
And pulled out a swerd and cride, "Hoo!	And pulled out a sword and cried, "Stop!
Namoore, up peyne of lesynge of youre heed!	No more, on the penalty of the loss of your head!
By myghty Mars, he shal anon be deed	By mighty Mars, he shall at once be dead
That smyteth any strook that I may seen.	Who smites any stroke that I can see.
But telleth me what myster men ye been,	But tell me what sort of men you are,
That been so hardy for to fighten heere	Who are so bold as to fight here
Withouten juge or oother officere,	Without judge or other officer,
As it were in a lystes roially."	As it would be in a properly conducted duel,"
This Palamon answerde hastily	This Palamon answered hastily
And seyde, "Sire, what nedeth wordes mo?	And said, "Sire, what more words are needed?
We have the deeth disserved bothe two.	We have deserved the death, both of us two.
Two woful wrecches been we, two caytyves,	Two woeful wretches are we, two miserable people,
That been encombred of oure owene lyves;	Who are burdened down by our own lives;
And as thou art a rightful lord and juge,	And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,
Ne yif us neither mercy ne refuge,	Give us neither mercy nor refuge,
But sle me first, for seinte charitee!	But slay me first, by holy charity!
But sle my felawe eek as wel as me;	But slay my fellow also as well as me;
Or sle hym first, for though thow knowest it lite,	Or slay him first, for though thou little knowest it,
This is thy mortal foo, this is Arcite,	This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,
That fro thy lond is banysshed on his heed,	Who is banished from thy land on (pain of losing) his head,
For which he hath deserved to be deed.	For which he has deserved to be dead.
For this is he that cam unto thy gate	For this is he that came unto thy gate
And seyde that he highte Philostrate.	And said that he was called Philostrate.
Thus hath he japed thee ful many a yer,	Thus has he tricked thee for many years,
And thou hast maked hym thy chief squier;	And thou hast made him thy chief squire;
And this is he that loveth Emelye.	And this is he that loves Emelye.
For sith the day is come that I shal dye,	For since the day is come that I must dye,
I make pleynly my confessioun	I make plainly my confession
That I am thilke woful Palamoun	That I am that same woeful Palamon
That hath thy prisoun broken wikkedly.	That wickedly has broken (out of) thy prison.
I am thy mortal foo, and it am I	I am thy mortal foe, and it is I
That loveth so hoote Emelye the brighte	Who loves the beautiful Emelye so passionately
That I wol dye present in hir sighte.	That I will die at this moment in her sight.
Wherfore I axe deeth and my juwise;	Therefore I ask death and my judicial sentence;
But sle my felawe in the same wise,	But slay my fellow in the same way,
For bothe han we deserved to be slayn."	For we have both deserved to be slain."
This worthy duc answerde anon agayn,	This worthy duke answered at once in reply,
And seyde, "This is a short conclusioun.	And said, "This is a brief (easy) decision.
Youre owene mouth, by youre confessioun,	Your own mouth, by your confession,
Hath dampned yow, and I wol it recorde;	Has condemned you, and I will pronounce it;
It nedeth noght to pyne yow with the corde.	There is no deed to torture you with the cord.
Ye shal be deed, by myghty Mars the rede!"	You shall be dead, by mighty Mars the red!"
The queene anon, for verray wommanhede,	The queen at once, for true womanliness,
Gan for to wepe, and so dide Emelye,	Began to weep, and so did Emelye,
And alle the ladyes in the compaignye.	And all the ladies in the company.
Greet pitee was it, as it thoughte hem alle,	Great pity was it, as it seemed to them all,
That evere swich a chaunce sholde falle,	That ever such a misfortune should occur,
For gentil men they were of greet estaat,	For they were gentle men of high rank,
And no thyng but for love was this debaat;	And this debate was for nothing but love;
And saugh hir blody woundes wyde and soore,	And saw their bloody wounds wide and sore,
And alle crieden, bothe lasse and moore,	And all cried, both low ranking and high,
"Have mercy, Lord, upon us wommen alle!"	"Have mercy, Lord, upon all of us women!"
And on hir bare knees adoun they falle	And they fall down on their bare knees
And wolde have kist his feet ther as he stood;	And would have kissed his feet there where he stood;
Til at the laste aslaked was his mood,	Until at the last his mood was calmed,
For pitee renneth soone in gentil herte.	For pity comes soon to a gentle heart.
And though he first for ire quook and sterte,	And though he first for anger shook and trembled,
He hath considered shortly, in a clause,	He has considered shortly, in brief,
The trespas of hem bothe, and eek the cause,	The trespass of them both, and also the cause,
And although that his ire hir gilt accused,	And although his anger reproached them for their guilt,
Yet in his resoun he hem bothe excused,	Yet in his reason he excused them both,
As thus: he thoghte wel that every man	As thus: he thought well that every man
Wol helpe hymself in love, if that he kan,	Will help himself in love, if he can,
And eek delivere hymself out of prisoun.	And also deliver himself out of prison.
And eek his herte hadde compassioun	And also his heart had compassion
Of wommen, for they wepen evere in oon,	Of women, for they weep continually,
And in his gentil herte he thoughte anon,	And in his gentle heart he thought straightway,
And softe unto hymself he seyde, "Fy	And softly to himself he said, "Fie
Upon a lord that wol have no mercy,	Upon a lord that will have no mercy,
But been a leon, bothe in word and dede,	But be a lion, both in word and deed,
To hem that been in repentaunce and drede,	To those who are in repentance and fear,
As wel as to a proud despitous man	As well as to a proud, spiteful man
That wol mayntene that he first bigan.	Who will persist in what he first began.
That lord hath litel of discrecioun,	That lord has little sound judgment,
That in swich cas kan no divisioun	That in such cases knows no distinctions
But weyeth pride and humblesse after oon."	But considers pride and humility equal."
And shortly, whan his ire is thus agoon,	And shortly, when his anger is thus gone,
He gan to looken up with eyen lighte	He began to look up with bright eyes
And spak thise same wordes al on highte:	And spoke these same words all aloud:
"The god of love, a benedicite!	"The god of love, ah, bless my soul!
How myghty and how greet a lord is he!	How mighty and how great a lord is he!
Ayeyns his myght ther gayneth none obstacles.	Against his power there avail no obstacles.
He may be cleped a god for his myracles,	He may be called a god for his miracles,
For he kan maken, at his owene gyse,	For he can make, as he pleases,
Of everich herte as that hym list divyse.	Of every heart whatever he wants to devise.
Lo heere this Arcite and this Palamoun,	Lo here this Arcite and this Palamon,
That quitly weren out of my prisoun,	Who freely were out of my prison,
And myghte han lyved in Thebes roially,	And could have lived royally in Thebes,
And witen I am hir mortal enemy,	And know I am their mortal enemy,
And that hir deth lith in my myght also,	And that their death lies in my power also,
And yet hath love, maugree hir eyen two,	And yet has Love, despite anything they could do,
Broght hem hyder bothe for to dye.	Brought them both hither to die.
Now looketh, is nat that an heigh folye?	Now look, is that not a great folly?
Who may been a fool but if he love?	Who can be a fool unless he is in love?
Bihoold, for Goddes sake that sit above,	Behold, for the sake of God who sits above,
Se how they blede! Be they noght wel arrayed?	See how they bleed! Are they not in fine condition?
Thus hath hir lord, the god of love, ypayed	Thus has their lord, the god of love, paid
Hir wages and hir fees for hir servyse!	Their wages and their fees for their service!
And yet they wenen for to been ful wyse	And yet they consider themselves very wise,
That serven love, for aught that may bifalle.	Those who serve love, whatever may happen.
But this is yet the beste game of alle,	But this is yet the best joke of all,
That she for whom they han this jolitee	That she for whom they have this sport
Kan hem therfore as muche thank as me.	Owes them as much gratitude for this as she owes me.
She woot namoore of al this hoote fare,	She knows no more of all this passionate business,
By God, than woot a cokkow or an hare!	By God, than knows a cuckoo or a hare!
But all moot ben assayed, hoot and coold;	But all must be tried, hot or cold;
A man moot ben a fool, or yong or oold --	A man must be a fool, either young or old --
I woot it by myself ful yore agon,	I know it by my own experience very long ago,
For in my tyme a servant was I oon.	For in my time I was a servant (of love).
And therfore, syn I knowe of loves peyne	And therefore, since I know of love's pain
And woot hou soore it kan a man distreyne,	And know how sorely it can afflict a man,
As he that hath ben caught ofte in his laas,	As one who has been often caught in its snare,
I yow foryeve al hoolly this trespaas,	I wholly forgive you this trespass,
At requeste of the queene, that kneleth heere,	At the request of the queen, who kneels here,
And eek of Emelye, my suster deere.	And also of Emelye, my dear sister.
And ye shul bothe anon unto me swere	And you must both immediately swear unto me
That nevere mo ye shal my contree dere,	That you shall never more harm my country,
Ne make werre upon me nyght ne day,	Nor make war upon me at any time,
But been my freendes in all that ye may.	But be my friends in all that you can.
I yow foryeve this trespas every deel."	I forgive you this trespass completely."
And they hym sworen his axyng faire and weel,	And they fairly and well swore to him (to do) his request,
And hym of lordshipe and of mercy preyde,	And prayed him to be their lord and to have mercy ,
And he hem graunteth grace, and thus he seyde:	And he grants them his favor, and thus he said:
"To speke of roial lynage and richesse,	"To speak of royal lineage and riches,
Though that she were a queene or a princesse,	Though she were a queen or a princess,
Ech of you bothe is worthy, doutelees,	Each of you both is worthy, doubtless,
To wedden whan tyme is; but nathelees --	To wed when it is time; but none the less --
I speke as for my suster Emelye,	I speak for my sister Emelye,
For whom ye have this strif and jalousye --	For whom you have this strife and jealousy --
Ye woot yourself she may nat wedden two	You know yourself she can not wed two
Atones, though ye fighten everemo,	At once, though you were to fight for evermore,
That oon of you, al be hym looth or lief,	That one of you, whether he likes it or not,
He moot go pipen in an yvy leef;	He must go whistle in an ivy leaf;
This is to seyn, she may nat now han bothe,	This is to say, she can not now have both,
Al be ye never so jalouse ne so wrothe.	Although you be never so jealous nor so angry.
And forthy I yow putte in this degree,	And therefore I put you in this situation,
That ech of yow shal have his destynee	That each of you shall have his destiny
As hym is shape, and herkneth in what wyse;	As is ordained for him, and listen in what way;
Lo, heere youre ende of that I shal devyse.	Lo, hear what I shall arrange for your fate.
My wyl is this, for plat conclusioun,	My will is this, for flat conclusion,
Withouten any repplicacioun --	Without any arguing --
If that you liketh, take it for the beste:	If this pleases you, take it for the best:
That everich of you shal goon where hym leste	That each one of you shall go where he pleases
Frely, withouten raunson or daunger,	Freely, without ransom or resistance,
And this day fifty wykes, fer ne ner,	And fifty weeks from this day, more or less,
Everich of you shal brynge an hundred knyghtes	Each one of you shall bring a hundred knights
Armed for lystes up at alle rightes,	Armed up for the lists in all respects,
Al redy to darreyne hire by bataille.	All ready to decide the right to her by battle.
And this bihote I yow withouten faille,	And this I promise you without fail,
Upon my trouthe, and as I am a knyght,	Upon my word, and as I am a knight,
That wheither of yow bothe that hath myght --	That whichever of you both who has the power --
This is to seyn, that wheither he or thow	This is to say, that whether he or thou
May with his hundred, as I spak of now,	Can with his hundred, as I spoke of now,
Sleen his contrarie, or out of lystes dryve,	Slay his opponent, or drive him out of the lists ,
Thanne shal I yeve Emelya to wyve	Then I shall give Emelye as wife
To whom that Fortune yeveth so fair a grace.	To whom Fortune gives so good a gift (to win the battle).
The lystes shal I maken in this place,	I shall make the lists in this place,
And God so wisly on my soule rewe	And as God may surely have pity on my soul
As I shal evene juge been and trewe.	I shall be an impartial and true judge.
Ye shul noon oother ende with me maken,	You shall make no other agreement with me,
That oon of yow ne shal be deed or taken.	(Save this:) that one of you must be dead or taken.
And if yow thynketh this is weel ysayd,	And if it seems to you that this is well said,
Seyeth youre avys, and holdeth you apayd.	Say your opinion, and consider yourself satisfied.
This is youre ende and youre conclusioun."	This is your (destined) end and your conclusion."
Who looketh lightly now but Palamoun?	Who but Palamon looks happy now?
Who spryngeth up for joye but Arcite?	Who springs up for joy but Arcite?
Who kouthe telle, or who kouthe it endite,	Who could tell, or who could describe in writing,
The joye that is maked in the place	The joy that is made in the place
Whan Theseus hath doon so fair a grace?	When Theseus has behaved so graciously?
But doun on knees wente every maner wight,	But down on knees went every sort of person,
And thonked hym with al hir herte and myght,	And thanked him with all their heart and might,
And namely the Thebans often sithe.	And especially the Thebans many times.
And thus with good hope and with herte blithe	And thus with good hope and with happy heart
They taken hir leve, and homward gonne they ride	They take their leave, and homeward did they ride
To Thebes with his olde walles wyde.	To Thebes with his old wide walls.
I trowe men wolde deme it necligence	I suppose men would consider it negligence
If I foryete to tellen the dispence	If I forget to tell the expenditure
Of Theseus, that gooth so bisily	Of Theseus, who goes (about) so busily
To maken up the lystes roially,	To build the lists royally,
That swich a noble theatre as it was	That such a noble theatre as it was
I dar wel seyen in this world ther nas.	I dare well say there was not (another such) in this world.
The circuit a myle was aboute,	The circumference was a mile around,
Walled of stoon, and dyched al withoute.	Walled with stone, and surrounded by a ditch.
Round was the shap, in manere of compas,	Round was the shape, in the manner of a circle,
Ful of degrees, the heighte of sixty pas,	Full of tiers of seats, the height of sixty paces,
That whan a man was set on o degree,	That when a man was set on one tier of seats,
He letted nat his felawe for to see.	He did not hinder his fellow from seeing.
Estward ther stood a gate of marbul whit,	Eastward there stood a gate of white marble,
Westward right swich another in the opposit.	Westward just such another on the opposite (side).
And shortly to concluden, swich a place	And shortly to conclude, such a place
Was noon in erthe, as in so litel space;	Was none in earth, (constructed) in so little time;
For in the lond ther was no crafty man	For in the land there was no skilled man
That geometrie or ars-metrike kan,	Who knows geometry or arithmetic,
Ne portreyour, ne kervere of ymages,	Nor painter, nor carver of images,
That Theseus ne yaf him mete and wages	That Theseus did not give him food and wages
The theatre for to maken and devyse.	To make and devise the theatre.
And for to doon his ryte and sacrifise,	And to do his rite and sacrifice,
He estward hath, upon the gate above,	He has eastward, upon the gate above,
In worshipe of Venus, goddesse of love,	In worship of Venus, goddess of love,
Doon make an auter and an oratorie;	Had made an altar and a chapel;
And on the gate westward, in memorie	And on the westward gate, in memory
Of Mars, he maked hath right swich another,	Of Mars, he has made just such another,
That coste largely of gold a fother.	That cost fully a cartload of gold.
And northward, in a touret on the wal,	And northward, in a turret on the wall,
Of alabastre whit and reed coral,	Of white alabaster and red coral,
An oratorie, riche for to see,	A chapel, rich to look upon,
In worshipe of Dyane of chastitee,	In worship of Diana of chastity,
Hath Theseus doon wroght in noble wyse.	Has Theseus had made in noble style.
But yet hadde I foryeten to devyse	But yet had I forgotten to describe
The noble kervyng and the portreitures,	The noble sculpture and the portraits,
The shap, the contenaunce, and the figures	The shape, the appearance, and the figures
That weren in thise oratories thre.	That were in these three chapels.
First in the temple of Venus maystow se	First in the temple of Venus canst thou see
Wroght on the wal, ful pitous to biholde,	Wrought on the wall, full piteous to behold,
The broken slepes, and the sikes colde,	The broken sleeps, and the cold sighs,
The sacred teeris, and the waymentynge,	The sacred tears, and the lamenting,
The firy strokes of the desirynge	The fiery strokes of the desiring
That loves servantz in this lyf enduren;	That love's servants endure in this life;
The othes that hir covenantz assuren;	The oaths that assure their covenants;
Pleasance and Hope, Desir, Foolhardynesse,	Pleasure and Hope, Desire, Foolhardiness,
Beautee and Youthe, Bauderie, Richesse,	Beauty and Youth, Mirth, Riches,
Charmes and Force, Lesynges, Flaterye,	Charms and Force, Lies, Flattery,
Despense, Bisynesse, and Jalousye,	Expenditures, Attentiveness, and Jealousy,
That wered of yelewe gooldes a gerland,	Who wore a garland of yellow marigolds,
And a cokkow sittynge on hir hand;	And a cuckoo sitting on her hand;
Festes, instrumentz, caroles, daunces,	Feasts, musical instruments, dance-songs, dances,
Lust and array, and alle the circumstaunces	Desire and festivity, and all the details
Of love, which that I rekned and rekne shal,	Of love, which I recounted and shall recount,
By ordre weren peynted on the wal,	Were painted in sequence on the wall,
And mo than I kan make of mencioun.	And more than I can make mention of.
For soothly al the mount of Citheroun,	For truly all the mount of Cithaeron,
Ther Venus hath hir principal dwellynge,	Where Venus has her principal dwelling,
Was shewed on the wal in portreyynge,	Was shown on the wall in portraits,
With al the gardyn and the lustynesse.	With all the garden (of Love) and the pleasure.
Nat was foryeten the porter, Ydelnesse,	The porter, Idleness, was not forgotten
Ne Narcisus the faire of yore agon,	Nor the handsome Narcissus of many years ago,
Ne yet the folye of kyng Salomon,	Nor yet the folly of king Solomon,
Ne yet the grete strengthe of Ercules --	Nor yet the great strength of Hercules --
Th'enchauntementz of Medea and Circes --	The enchantments of Medea and Circes --
Ne of Turnus, with the hardy fiers corage,	Nor of Turnus, with the hardy fierce courage,
The riche Cresus, kaytyf in servage.	The riche Cresus, wretched in servitude.
Thus may ye seen that wysdom ne richesse,	Thus can you see that wisdom nor riches,
Beautee ne sleighte, strengthe ne hardynesse,	Beauty nor trickery, strength nor bravery,
Ne may with Venus holde champartie,	Can not share power with Venus,
For as hir list the world than may she gye.	For she may rule the world as she pleases.
Lo, alle thise folk so caught were in hir las,	Lo, all these folk were so caught in her snare,
Til they for wo ful ofte seyde "allas!"	Until for woe they very often said "alas!"
Suffiseth heere ensamples oon or two,	One or two examples here suffice,
And though I koude rekene a thousand mo.	Even though I could recount a thousand more.
The statue of Venus, glorious for to se,	The statue of Venus, glorious to look upon,
Was naked, fletynge in the large see,	Was naked, floating in the large sea,
And fro the navele doun al covered was	And from the navel down all was covered
With wawes grene, and brighte as any glas.	With waves green and bright as any glass.
A citole in hir right hand hadde she,	She had a citole (zither-like instrument) in her right hand,
And on hir heed, ful semely for to se,	And on her head, very elegant to look upon,
A rose gerland, fressh and wel smellynge;	A rose garland, fresh and fragrant;
Above hir heed hir dowves flikerynge.	Above her head her doves fluttering.
Biforn hire stood hir sone Cupido;	Before her stood her son Cupid;
Upon his shuldres wynges hadde he two,	He had two wings upon his shoulders,
And blynd he was, as it is often seene;	And he was blind, as it is often seen;
A bowe he bar and arwes brighte and kene.	He carried a bow and arrows bright and keen.
Why sholde I noght as wel eek telle yow al	Why should I not as well also tell you all
The portreiture that was upon the wal	The portraiture that was upon the wall
Withinne the temple of myghty Mars the rede?	Within the temple of mighty Mars the red?
Al peynted was the wal, in lengthe and brede,	All painted was the wall, in length and breadth,
Lyk to the estres of the grisly place	Like to the interior of the grisly place
That highte the grete temple of Mars in Trace,	That is called the Great Temple of Mars in Thrace,
In thilke colde, frosty regioun	In that same cold, frosty region
Ther as Mars hath his sovereyn mansioun.	Where Mars has his most excellent mansion.
First on the wal was peynted a forest,	First a forest was painted on the wall,
In which ther dwelleth neither man ne best,	In which there dwells neither man nor beast,
With knotty, knarry, bareyne trees olde,	With knotty, gnarled, barren old trees,
Of stubbes sharpe and hidouse to biholde,	Of stumps sharp and hideous to behold,
In which ther ran a rumbel in a swough,	Through which there ran a rumbling in a moaning of wind,
As though a storm sholde bresten every bough.	As though a storm should burst every bough.
And dounward from an hille, under a bente,	And downward from a hill, close to a grassy slope,
Ther stood the temple of Mars armypotente,	There stood the temple of Mars, powerful in arms,
Wroght al of burned steel, of which the entree	Wrought all of burnished steel, of which the entry
Was long and streit, and gastly for to se.	Was long and narrow, and frightening to look upon.
And therout came a rage and swich a veze	And out of there came a rush of wind and such a blast
That it made al the gate for to rese.	That it made all the gate to shake.
The northren lyght in at the dores shoon,	The northern light shone in at the doors,
For wyndowe on the wal ne was ther noon,	For there was no window on the wall,
Thurgh which men myghten any light discerne.	Through which men might discern any light.
The dore was al of adamant eterne,	The door was all of eternal adamant (hardest of stones),
Yclenched overthwart and endelong	Bound crosswise and lengthwise
With iren tough; and for to make it strong,	With tough iron; and to make it strong,
Every pyler, the temple to sustene,	Every pillar, to support the temple,
Was tonne-greet, of iren bright and shene.	Was big as a large barrel, (made) of iron bright and shining.
Ther saugh I first the derke ymaginyng	There I saw first the malicious plotting
Of Felonye, and al the compassyng;	Of Felony, and all the scheming;
The crueel Ire, reed as any gleede;	The cruel Anger, red as any glowing coal;
The pykepurs, and eek the pale Drede;	The pick-purse, and also the pale Fear;
The smylere with the knyf under the cloke;	The smiler with the knife under the cloak;
The shepne brennynge with the blake smoke;	The stable burning with the black smoke;
The tresoun of the mordrynge in the bedde;	The treason of the murdering in the bed;
The open werre, with woundes al bibledde;	The open war, all covered with blood from wounds:
Contek, with blody knyf and sharp manace.	Strife, with bloody knife and sharp menacing.
Al ful of chirkyng was that sory place.	All full of creaking was that sorry place.
The sleere of hymself yet saugh I ther --	There yet I saw slayer of himself there --
His herte-blood hath bathed al his heer --	His heart-blood has bathed all his hair --
The nayl ydryven in the shode anyght;	The nail driven in the top of the head at night;
The colde deeth, with mouth gapyng upright.	The cold death, with mouth gaping upwards.
Amyddes of the temple sat Meschaunce,	Amidst the temple sat Misfortune,
With disconfort and sory contenaunce.	With grief and sorry countenance.
Yet saugh I Woodnesse, laughynge in his rage,	Yet I saw Madness, laughing in his rage,
Armed Compleint, Outhees, and fiers Outrage;	Armed Discontent, Alarm, and fierce Violence;
The careyne in the busk, with throte ycorve;	The corpse in the woods, with (its) throat cut;
A thousand slayn, and nat of qualm ystorve;	A thousand slain, and not killed by the plague;
The tiraunt, with the pray by force yraft;	The tyrant, with his prey taken by force;
The toun destroyed, ther was no thyng laft.	The town destroyed, there was nothing left.
Yet saugh I brent the shippes hoppesteres;	Yet I saw burned the ships dancing (on the waves);
The hunte strangled with the wilde beres;	The hunter killed by the wild bears;
The sowe freten the child right in the cradel;	The sow devouring the child right in the cradle;
The cook yscalded, for al his longe ladel.	The cook scalded, despite his long-handled spoon.
Noght was foryeten by the infortune of Marte.	Nothing concerning the evil influence of Mars was forgotten.
The cartere overryden with his carte --	The wagon driver run over by his wagon --
Under the wheel ful lowe he lay adoun.	He lay down full low under the wheel.
Ther were also, of Martes divisioun,	There were also, of those influenced by Mars,
The barbour, and the bocher, and the smyth,	The barber, and the butcher, and the smith,
That forgeth sharpe swerdes on his styth.	Who forges sharp swords on his anvil.
And al above, depeynted in a tour,	And all above, painted in a tower,
Saugh I Conquest, sittynge in greet honour,	I saw conquest, sitting in great honor,
With the sharpe swerd over his heed	With the sharp sword over his head
Hangynge by a soutil twynes threed.	Hanging by a thin thread of twine.
Depeynted was the slaughtre of Julius,	Depicted was the slaughter of Julius,
Of grete Nero, and of Antonius;	Of great Nero, and of Antonius;
Al be that thilke tyme they were unborn,	Although at that same time they were unborn,
Yet was hir deth depeynted ther-biforn	Yet was their death depicted before then
By manasynge of Mars, right by figure;	By menacing of Mars, according to the horoscope;
So was it shewed in that portreiture,	So was it shown in that portraiture,
As is depeynted in the sterres above	As is depicted in the stars above
Who shal be slayn or elles deed for love.	Who shall be slain or else dead for love.
Suffiseth oon ensample in stories olde;	Suffices one illustrative tale in old histories;
I may nat rekene hem alle though I wolde.	I can not recount them all even if I desired to.
The statue of Mars upon a carte stood	The statue of Mars stood upon a chariot
Armed, and looked grym as he were wood;	Armed, and looked as grim as if he were mad;
And over his heed ther shynen two figures	And over his head there shine two figures
Of sterres, that been cleped in scriptures,	Of stars, that are called in books,
That oon Puella, that oother Rubeus --	That one Puella, that other Rubeus --
This god of armes was arrayed thus.	This god of arms was arrayed thus.
A wolf ther stood biforn hym at his feet	A wolf stood there before him at his feet
With eyen rede, and of a man he eet;	With red eyes, and he ate of a man;
With soutil pencel was depeynted this storie	With subtle brush was depicted this story
In redoutynge of Mars and of his glorie.	In reverence of Mars and of his glory.
Now to the temple of Dyane the chaste,	Now to the temple of Diana the chaste,
As shortly as I kan, I wol me haste,	As briefly as I can, I will hasten myself,
To telle yow al the descripsioun.	To tell you all the description.
Depeynted been the walles up and doun	The walls are painted all over
Of huntyng and of shamefast chastitee.	(With scenes) of hunting and of modest chastity.
Ther saugh I how woful Calistopee,	There I saw how woeful Callisto,
Whan that Diane agreved was with here,	When Diana was angry with her,
Was turned from a womman til a bere,	Was turned from a woman into a bear,
And after was she maad the loode-sterre.	And after she was made the North Star
Thus was it peynted; I kan sey yow no ferre.	Thus was it painted; I can tell you no more.
Hir sone is eek a sterre, as men may see.	Her son is also a star, as one can see.
Ther saugh I Dane, yturned til a tree --	There I saw Daphne, turned into a tree --
I mene nat the goddesse Diane,	I mean not the goddess Diana,
But Penneus doghter, which that highte Dane.	But Penneus' daughter, who is called Daphne.
Ther saugh I Attheon an hert ymaked,	There I saw Actaeon changed into a hart,
For vengeaunce that he saugh Diane al naked;	For vengeance that he saw Diana all naked;
I saugh how that his houndes have hym caught	I saw how his hounds have caught him
And freeten hym, for that they knewe hym naught.	And devoured him, because they did not know him.
Yet peynted was a litel forther moor	Yet was painted a little further on
How Atthalante hunted the wilde boor,	How Atalanta hunted the wild boar,
And Meleagre, and many another mo,	And Meleager, and many more others,
For which Dyane wroghte hym care and wo.	For which Diana wrought him care and woe.
Ther saugh I many another wonder storie,	There I saw many another wonderful story,
The which me list nat drawen to memorie.	The which I do not desire to call to mind.
This goddesse on an hert ful hye seet,	This goddess sat full high on a hart,
With smale houndes al aboute hir feet,	With small hounds all about her feet,
And undernethe hir feet she hadde a moone --	And underneath her feet she had a moon --
Wexynge it was and sholde wanye soone.	Waxing it was and should wane soon.
In gaude grene hir statue clothed was,	Her statue was clothed in yellowish green,
With bowe in honde and arwes in a cas.	With bow in hand and arrows in a quiver.
Hir eyen caste she ful lowe adoun	She cast her eyes down full low
Ther Pluto hath his derke regioun.	Where Pluto has his dark region.
A womman travaillynge was hire biforn;	A woman in childbirth was before her;
But for hir child so longe was unborn,	But because her child was so long unborn,
Ful pitously Lucyna gan she calle	Very piteously did she call on Lucina
And seyde, "Help, for thou mayst best of alle!"	And said, "Help, for thou canst (do so) best of all!"
Wel koude he peynten lifly that it wroghte;	He who made it well knew how to paint in a life-like manner;
With many a floryn he the hewes boghte.	With many a florin he bought the paints.
Now been thise lystes maad, and Theseus,	Now these lists are made, and Theseus,
That at his grete cost arrayed thus	Who at his great cost thus prepared
The temples and the theatre every deel,	The temples and the theatre in all respects,
Whan it was doon, hym lyked wonder weel.	When it was done, it greatly pleased him.
But stynte I wole of Theseus a lite,	But I will stop speaking of Theseus a little while,
And speke of Palamon and of Arcite.	And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
The day approcheth of hir retournynge,	The day of their return approaches,
That everich sholde an hundred knyghtes brynge	When each one should bring a hundred knights
The bataille to darreyne, as I yow tolde.	To decide the battle, as I told you.
And til Atthenes, hir covenant for to holde,	And to Athens, to keep their agreement,
Hath everich of hem broght an hundred knyghtes,	Each one of them has brought a hundred knights,
Wel armed for the werre at alle rightes.	Well armed for the battle in all respects.
And sikerly ther trowed many a man	And surely many a man there believed
That nevere, sithen that the world bigan,	That never, since the world began,
As for to speke of knyghthod of hir hond,	To speak of knighthood of (the deeds of) their hand,
As fer as God hath maked see or lond,	As far as God has made sea or land,
Nas of so fewe so noble a compaignye.	Was not of so few so noble a company.
For every wight that lovede chivalrye	For every person that loved chivalry
And wolde, his thankes, han a passant name,	And would, willingly, have an outstanding reputation
Hath preyed that he myghte been of that game;	Has prayed that he might participate in that game;
And wel was hym that therto chosen was,	And well it was for him who was chosen to be there,
For if ther fille tomorwe swich a cas,	For if there fell tomorrow such a situation,
Ye knowen wel that every lusty knyght	You know well that every vigorous knight
That loveth paramours and hath his myght,	Who loves passionately and has his might,
Were it in Engelond or elleswhere,	Were it in England or elsewhere,
They wolde, hir thankes, wilnen to be there --	They would, willingly, desire to be there --
To fighte for a lady, benedicitee!	To fight for a lady, bless me!
It were a lusty sighte for to see.	It would be a pleasing sight to see.
And right so ferden they with Palamon.	And right so fared those with Palamon.
With hym ther wenten knyghtes many on;	With him there went knights many a one;
Som wol ben armed in an haubergeoun,	One of them will be armed in a coat of mail,
And in a brestplate and a light gypoun;	And in a breastplate and a light tunic;
And som wol have a paire plates large;	And one of them will have a set of plate armor;
And som wol have a Pruce sheeld or a targe;	And one of them will have a Prussian shield or a buckler;
Som wol ben armed on his legges weel,	One of them will be well armed on his legs,
And have an ax, and som a mace of steel --	And have an axe, and one a mace of steel --
Ther is no newe gyse that it nas old.	There is no new fashion that has not been old.
Armed were they, as I have yow told,	They were armed, as I have told you,
Everych after his opinioun.	Every one according to his preference.
Ther maistow seen, comynge with Palamoun,	There mayst thou seen, coming with Palamon,
Lygurge hymself, the grete kyng of Trace.	Lycurgus himself, the great king of Thrace.
Blak was his berd, and manly was his face;	Black was his beard, and manly was his face;
The cercles of his eyen in his heed,	The circles of his eyes in his head,
They gloweden bitwixen yelow and reed,	They glowed between yellow and red,
And lik a grifphon looked he aboute,	And he looked about like a griffin (with an eagle's head),
With kempe heeris on his browes stoute;	With shaggy hairs on his stout brows;
His lymes grete, his brawnes harde and stronge,	His limbs large, his muscles hard and strong,
His shuldres brode, his armes rounde and longe;	His shoulders broad, his arms round and long;
And as the gyse was in his contree,	And as was the fashion in his country,
Ful hye upon a chaar of gold stood he,	He stood full high upon a chariot of gold,
With foure white boles in the trays.	With four white bulls in the traces.
In stede of cote-armure over his harnays,	Instead of a tunic with his coat of arms over his armor,
With nayles yelewe and brighte as any gold,	With claws yellow and bright as any gold,
He hadde a beres skyn, col-blak for old.	He had a bear's skin, coal-black because of age.
His longe heer was kembd bihynde his bak;	His long hair was combed behind his back;
As any ravenes fethere it shoon for blak;	Like any raven's feather it shone because of its blackness;
A wrethe of gold, arm-greet, of huge wighte,	A wreath of gold, thick as an arm, of huge weight,
Upon his heed, set ful of stones brighte,	Upon his head, set full of bright stones,
Of fyne rubyes and of dyamauntz.	Of fine rubies and of diamonds.
Aboute his chaar ther wenten white alauntz,	About his chariot there went white wolfhounds,
Twenty and mo, as grete as any steer,	Twenty and more, as big as any steer,
To hunten at the leoun or the deer,	To hunt for the lion or the deer,
And folwed hym with mosel faste ybounde,	And followed him with muzzles securely bound,
Colered of gold, and tourettes fyled rounde.	Wearing collars of gold, and rings for leashes filed round.
An hundred lordes hadde he in his route,	He had a hundred lords in his company,
Armed ful wel, with hertes stierne and stoute.	Very well armed, with stern and stout hearts.
With Arcita, in stories as men fynde,	With Arcite, as people find in histories,
The grete Emetreus, the kyng of Inde,	The great Emetreus, the king of India,
Upon a steede bay trapped in steel,	Upon a reddish-brown steed with trappings of steel,
Covered in clooth of gold, dyapred weel,	Covered in cloth of gold, well decorated (with geometric patterns),
Cam ridynge lyk the god of armes, Mars.	Came riding like the god of arms, Mars.
His cote-armure was of clooth of Tars	His tunic with his coat of arms was of cloth of Tarsia (in Turkestan)
Couched with perles white and rounde and grete;	Adorned with pearls white and round and big;
His sadel was of brend gold newe ybete;	His saddle was newly adorned with pure gold;
A mantelet upon his shulder hangynge,	A short cloak hanging upon his shoulder,
Bret-ful of rubyes rede as fyr sparklynge;	Brimful of rubies red as sparkling fire;
His crispe heer lyk rynges was yronne,	His curly hair like rings was run (fashioned),
And that was yelow, and glytered as the sonne.	And that was yellow, and glittered like the sun.
His nose was heigh, his eyen bright citryn,	His nose was high, his eyes bright lemon yellow,
His lippes rounde, his colour was sangwyn;	His lips round, his color was ruddy;
A fewe frakenes in his face yspreynd,	A few freckles were sprinkled in his face,
Bitwixen yelow and somdel blak ymeynd;	Between yellow and somewhat mingled with black;
And as a leon he his lookyng caste.	And as a lion he cast about his look.
Of fyve and twenty yeer his age I caste.	I reckon his age at five and twenty years.
His berd was wel bigonne for to sprynge;	His beard had well begun to spring;
His voys was as a trompe thonderynge.	His voice was like a trumpet thundering.
Upon his heed he wered of laurer grene	Upon his head he wore of green laurel
A gerland, fressh and lusty for to sene.	A garland, fresh and pleasing to look upon.
Upon his hand he bar for his deduyt	Upon his hand he carried for his delight
An egle tame, as any lilye whyt.	A tame eagle, white as any lily.
An hundred lordes hadde he with hym there,	He had a hundred lords with him there,
Al armed, save hir heddes, in al hir gere,	All armed, except for their heads, in all their equipment,
Ful richely in alle maner thynges.	Very richly in every detail.
For trusteth wel that dukes, erles, kynges	For trust well that dukes, earls, kings
Were gadered in this noble compaignye,	Were gathered in this noble company,
For love and for encrees of chivalrye.	For love and for the benefit of chivalry.
Aboute this kyng ther ran on every part	About this king there ran on all sides
Ful many a tame leon and leopart.	Full many a tame lion and leopard.
And in this wise thise lordes, alle and some,	And in this manner these lords, one and all,
Been on the Sonday to the citee come	Are come to the city on the Sunday
Aboute pryme, and in the toun alight.	About nine a.m., and in the town dismounted.
This Theseus, this duc, this worthy knyght,	This Theseus, this duke, this worthy knight,
Whan he had broght hem into his citee,	When he had brought them into his city,
And inned hem, everich at his degree,	And provided them lodging, each one according to his rank,
He festeth hem, and dooth so greet labour	He feasts them, and does such great labor
To esen hem and doon hem al honour	To entertain them and do them all honor
That yet men wenen that no mannes wit	That people still believe that the wit of no man
Of noon estaat ne koude amenden it.	Of any rank could do better.
The mynstralcye, the service at the feeste,	The music, the service at the feast,
The grete yiftes to the meeste and leeste,	The great gifts to every one,
The riche array of Theseus paleys,	The rich adornment of Theseus' palace,
Ne who sat first ne last upon the deys,	Nor who sat first nor last upon the dais,
What ladyes fairest been or best daunsynge,	What ladies are fairest or best in dancing,
Or which of hem kan dauncen best and synge,	Or which of them can dance best and sing,
Ne who moost felyngly speketh of love;	Nor who speaks most feelingly of love;
What haukes sitten on the perche above,	What hawks sit on the perch above,
What houndes liggen on the floor adoun --	What hounds lie down on the floor --
Of al this make I now no mencioun,	I now make no mention of all this,
But al th' effect; that thynketh me the beste.	But (speak only) of the substance; that seems to me the best.
Now cometh the point, and herkneth if yow leste.	Now comes the point, and listen if you please.
The Sonday nyght, er day bigan to sprynge,	The Sunday night, before day began to spring,
Whan Palamon the larke herde synge	When Palamon heard the lark sing
(Although it nere nat day by houres two,	(Although it was not day by two hours,
Yet the larke sang) and Palamon right then	Yet sang the lark) and Palamon right then
With hooly herte and with an heigh corage,	With pious heart and with a noble disposition,
He roos to wenden on his pilgrymage	He rose to go on his pilgrimage
Unto the blissful Citherea benign --	To the blessed gracious Citherea --
I mene Venus, honurable and digne.	I mean Venus, honorable and worshipful.
And in hir houre he walketh forth a pas	And in her (planetary) hour he walks forth slowly
Unto the lystes ther hire temple was,	Unto the lists where her temple was,
And doun he kneleth, and with humble cheere	And down he kneels, and with humble expression
And herte soor he seyde as ye shal heere:	And painful heart he said as you shall hear:
"Faireste of faire, O lady myn, Venus,	"Fairest of the fair, O lady mine, Venus,
Doughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcanus,	Daughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcan,
Thow gladere of the mount of Citheron,	Thou maker of joy of the mount of Citheron,
For thilke love thow haddest to Adoon,	For that same love thou haddest to Adonis,
Have pitee of my bittre teeris smerte,	Have pity on my bitter, smarting tears,
And taak myn humble preyere at thyn herte.	And take my humble prayer to thy heart.
Allas! I ne have no langage to telle	Alas! I do not have any language to tell
Th'effectes ne the tormentz of myn helle;	The effects nor the torments of my hell;
Myn herte may myne harmes nat biwreye;	My heart can not reveal my harms;
I am so confus that I kan noght seye	I am so befuddled that I can not say (anything)
But `Mercy, lady bright, that knowest weele	But `Mercy, lady bright, who knowest well
My thought and seest what harmes that I feele!'	My thought and seest what harms I feel!'
Considere al this and rewe upon my soore,	Consider all this and have pity upon my pain,
As wisly as I shal for everemoore,	As surely as I shall for evermore,
Emforth my myght, thy trewe servant be,	According to my power (as much as I can), be thy true servant,
And holden werre alwey with chastitee.	And make war always against chastity.
That make I myn avow, so ye me helpe!	I make that my vow, providing you help me!
I kepe noght of armes for to yelpe,	I care not to boast of arms
Ne I ne axe nat tomorwe to have victorie,	Nor do I ask to have victory tomorrow,
Ne renoun in this cas, ne veyne glorie	Nor renown in this case, nor vain glory
Of pris of armes blowen up and doun;	Nor fame for deeds of arms proclaimed everywhere;
But I wolde have fully possessioun	But I would have fully possession
Of Emelye, and dye in thy servyse.	Of Emelye, and die in thy service.
Fynd thow the manere hou and in what wyse:	Find thou the manner how and in what way:
I recche nat but it may bettre be	I care not if it may better be
To have victorie of hem, or they of me,	To have victory over them, or they over me,
So that I have my lady in myne armes.	So that I have my lady in my arms.
For though so be that Mars is god of armes,	For though it be true that Mars is god of arms,
Youre vertu is so greet in hevene above	Your power is so great in heaven above
That if yow list, I shal wel have my love.	That if you please, I shall well have my love.
Thy temple wol I worshipe everemo,	I will worship thy temple evermore,
And on thyn auter, where I ride or go,	And on thy altar, whether I ride or walk (whatever I do),
I wol doon sacrifice and fires beete.	I will do sacrifice and kindle fires.
And if ye wol nat so, my lady sweete,	And if you will not (do) so, my lady sweet,
Thanne preye I thee, tomorwe with a spere	Then I pray thee, tomorrow with a spear
That Arcita me thurgh the herte bere.	That Arcite stab me through the heart.
Thanne rekke I noght, whan I have lost my lyf,	Then I care not, when I have lost my life,
Though that Arcita wynne hire to his wyf.	Though Arcite win her to be his wife.
This is th'effect and ende of my preyere:	This is the substance and goal of my prayer:
Yif me my love, thow blisful lady deere."	Give me my love, thou blessed dear lady."
Whan the orison was doon of Palamon,	When the prayer of Palamon was done,
His sacrifice he dide, and that anon,	He did his sacrifice, and that quickly,
Ful pitously, with alle circumstaunces,	Full piteously, with all due ceremony,
Al telle I noght as now his observaunces;	Although I tell not now his observances;
But atte laste the statue of Venus shook,	But at the last the statue of Venus shook,
And made a signe, wherby that he took	And made a sign, whereby he understood
That his preyere accepted was that day.	That his prayer was accepted that day.
For thogh the signe shewed a delay,	For though the sign showed a delay,
Yet wiste he wel that graunted was his boone,	Yet he knew well that his request was granted,
And with glad herte he wente hym hoom ful soone.	And with glad heart he went home very soon.
The thridde houre inequal that Palamon	The third planetary hour after Palamon
Bigan to Venus temple for to gon,	Began to go to Venus' temple,
Up roos the sonne, and up roos Emelye	Up rose the sun, and up rose Emelye
And to the temple of Dyane gan hye.	And to the temple of Diana did hasten.
Hir maydens, that she thider with hire ladde,	Her maidens, whom she led thither with her,
Ful redily with hem the fyr they hadde,	They had the fire full readily with them,
Th'encens, the clothes, and the remenant al	The incense, the cloths, and all the rest
That to the sacrifice longen shal;	That is needed for the sacrifice;
The hornes fulle of meeth, as was the gyse --	The horns full of mead, as was the custom --
Ther lakked noght to doon hir sacrifise.	There lacked nothing (needed) to do her sacrifice.
Smokynge the temple, ful of clothes faire,	The temple smoking (with incense), full of fair cloths,
This Emelye, with herte debonaire,	This Emelye, with gentle heart,
Hir body wessh with water of a welle.	Washed her body with water of a well.
But hou she dide hir ryte I dar nat telle,	But how she did her rite I dare not tell,
But it be any thing in general;	Unless it be some thing in general;
And yet it were a game to heeren al.	And yet it would be a pleasure to hear all.
To hym that meneth wel it were no charge;	To one who means well it would be no matter of concern;
But it is good a man been at his large.	But it is good for a man to be without restriction (speak freely).
Hir brighte heer was kembd, untressed al;	Her bright hair was combed, all loose;
A coroune of a grene ook cerial	A crown of an evergreen oak
Upon hir heed was set ful fair and meete.	Was set upon her head full fair and suitable.
Two fyres on the auter gan she beete,	Two fires on the altar did she kindle,
And dide hir thynges, as men may biholde	And did her duties, as men can behold
In Stace of Thebes and thise bookes olde.	In Statius' Thebaid and such old books.
Whan kyndled was the fyr, with pitous cheere	When the fire was kindled, with a pitiful expression
Unto Dyane she spak as ye may heere:	Unto Diana she spoke as you may hear:
"O chaste goddesse of the wodes grene,	"O chaste goddess of the green woods,
To whom bothe hevene and erthe and see is sene,	To whom both heaven and earth and sea is visible,
Queene of the regne of Pluto derk and lowe,	Queen of the dark and low reign of Pluto,
Goddesse of maydens, that myn herte hast knowe	Goddess of maidens, whom my heart hast known
Ful many a yeer, and woost what I desire,	Full many a year, and knowest what I desire,
As keepe me fro thy vengeaunce and thyn ire,	Keep me from thy vengeance and thy ire,
That Attheon aboughte cruelly.	Which Acteon paid for cruelly.
Chaste goddesse, wel wostow that I	Chaste goddess, well knowest thou that I
Desire to ben a mayden al my lyf,	Desire to be a maiden all my life,
Ne nevere wol I be no love ne wyf.	Nor never will I be no lover nor wife.
I am, thow woost, yet of thy compaignye,	I am, thou knowest, yet of thy company,
A mayde, and love huntynge and venerye,	A maiden, and love hunting and the chase,
And for to walken in the wodes wilde,	And to walk in the wild woods,
And noght to ben a wyf and be with childe.	And not to be a wife and be with child.
Noght wol I knowe compaignye of man.	I do not desire to know company of man.
Now help me, lady, sith ye may and kan,	Now help me, lady, since you can and know how,
For tho thre formes that thou hast in thee.	For those three forms that thou hast in thee.
And Palamon, that hath swich love to me,	And Palamon, that has such love to me,
And eek Arcite, that loveth me so soore,	And also Arcite, who loves me so painfully,
This grace I preye thee withoute moore,	This grace I pray thee and ask no more,
As sende love and pees bitwixe hem two,	Send love and peace between them two,
And fro me turne awey hir hertes so	And turn away their hearts from me so
That al hire hoote love and hir desir,	That all their hot love and their desire,
And al hir bisy torment, and hir fir	And all their intense torment, and their fire
Be queynt, or turned in another place.	Will be quenched, or turned to another place.
And if so be thou wolt nat do me grace,	And if it so be thou wilt not do me grace,
Or if my destynee be shapen so	Or if my destiny is shaped so
That I shal nedes have oon of hem two,	That I must by necessity have one of them two,
As sende me hym that moost desireth me.	Send me him who most desires me.
Bihoold, goddesse of clene chastitee,	Behold, goddess of clean chastity,
The bittre teeris that on my chekes falle.	The bitter tears that fall on my cheeks.
Syn thou art mayde and kepere of us alle,	Since thou art maiden and guardian of us all,
My maydenhede thou kepe and wel conserve,	Thou care for and well conserve my maidenhood,
And whil I lyve, a mayde I wol thee serve."	And while I live, as a maiden I will serve thee."
The fires brenne upon the auter cleere,	The fires burn brightly upon the altar,
Whil Emelye was thus in hir preyere.	While Emelye was thus in her prayer.
But sodeynly she saugh a sighte queynte,	But suddenly she saw a curious sight,
For right anon oon of the fyres queynte	For right away one of the fires quenched
And quyked agayn, and after that anon	And rekindled again, and after that straightway
That oother fyr was queynt and al agon;	That other fire was quenched and all gone;
And as it queynte it made a whistelynge,	And as it quenched it made a roaring sound,
As doon thise wete brondes in hir brennynge,	As these wet brands do in their burning,
And at the brondes ende out ran anon	And at the brand's end (the fire) ran out straightway
As it were blody dropes many oon;	As if it were many bloody drops;
For which so soore agast was Emelye	For which so sorely frightened was Emelye
That she was wel ny mad and gan to crye,	That she was well nigh mad and began to cry,
For she ne wiste what it signyfied,	For she did not know what it signified,
But oonly for the feere thus hath she cried,	But simply for fear has she cried thus,
And weep that it was pitee for to heere.	And wept that it was a pity to hear.
And therwithal Dyane gan appeere,	And right then Diana did appear,
With bowe in honde, right as an hunteresse,	With bow in hand, just like a huntress,
And seyde, "Doghter, stynt thyn hevynesse.	And said, "Daughter, cease thy sadness.
Among the goddes hye it is affermed,	Among the high gods it is affirmed,
And by eterne word writen and confermed,	And by eternal word written and confirmed,
Thou shalt ben wedded unto oon of tho	Thou shalt be wedded unto one of those
That han for thee so muchel care and wo,	Who have for thee so much care and woe,
But unto which of hem I may nat telle.	But unto which of them I may not tell.
Farwel, for I ne may no lenger dwelle.	Farwell, for I can stay no longer .
The fires which that on myn auter brenne	The fires which burn on my altar
Shulle thee declaren, er that thou go henne,	Shall declare to thee, before thou go hence,
Thyn aventure of love, as in this cas."	Thy destiny concerning love, as in this situation."
And with that word, the arwes in the caas	And with that word, the arrows in the quiver
Of the goddesse clateren faste and rynge,	Of the goddess clatter fast and ring,
And forth she wente and made a vanysshynge;	And forth she went and vanished;
For which this Emelye astoned was,	For which this Emelye was astonished,
And seyde, "What amounteth this, allas?	And said, "What does this mean, alas?
I putte me in thy proteccioun,	I put me in thy protection,
Dyane, and in thy disposicioun."	Diana, and in thy power."
And hoom she goth anon the nexte weye.	And home she goes at once the nearest way.
This is th'effect; ther is namoore to seye.	This is the substance; there is no more to say.
The nexte houre of Mars folwynge this,	The next (planetary) hour of Mars following this,
Arcite unto the temple walked is	Arcite has walked unto the temple
Of fierse Mars to doon his sacrifise,	Of fierce Mars to do his sacrifice,
With alle the rytes of his payen wyse.	With all the rites of his pagan manner (of worship).
With pitous herte and heigh devocioun,	With sorrowful heart and intense devotion,
Right thus to Mars he seyde his orisoun:	Right thus to Mars he said his prayer:
"O stronge god, that in the regnes colde	"O strong god, who in the cold reigns
Of Trace honoured art and lord yholde,	Of Thrace art honored and considered lord,
And hast in every regne and every lond	And hast in every reign and every land
Of armes al the brydel in thyn hond,	All the control of arms in thy hand,
And hem fortunest as thee lyst devyse,	And grants them fortune as it pleases thee to command.
Accepte of me my pitous sacrifise.	Accept of me my sorrowful sacrifice.
If so be that my youthe may deserve,	If it so be that my youth may deserve,
And that my myght be worthy for to serve	And that my power be worthy to serve
Thy godhede, that I may been oon of thyne,	Thy godhead, so that I may be one of thine,
Thanne preye I thee to rewe upon my pyne.	Then pray I thee to have pity upon my pain.
For thilke peyne and thilke hoote fir	For that same pain and that same hot fire
In which thow whilom brendest for desir,	In which thou once burned for desire,
Whan that thow usedest the beautee	When that thou enjoyed the beauty
Of faire, yonge, fresshe Venus free,	Of fair, young, fresh Venus the noble,
And haddest hire in armes at thy wille --	And haddest her in arms as you wished --
Although thee ones on a tyme mysfille,	Although once things went wrong for you,
Whan Vulcanus hadde caught thee in his las	When Vulcan had caught thee in his snare
And foond thee liggynge by his wyf, allas! --	And found thee lying by his wife, alas! --
For thilke sorwe that was in thyn herte,	For that same sorrow that was in thy heart,
Have routhe as wel upon my peynes smerte.	Have pity as well upon my painful sufferings.
I am yong and unkonnynge, as thow woost,	I am young and ignorant, as thou knowest,
And, as I trowe, with love offended moost	And, as I suppose, injured most by love
That evere was any lyves creature,	Than ever was any living creature,
For she that dooth me al this wo endure	For she that causes me to endure all this woe
Ne reccheth nevere wher I synke or fleete.	Nor cares never whether I sink or swim.
And wel I woot, er she me mercy heete,	And well I know, before she may promise me mercy,
I moot with strengthe wynne hire in the place,	I must win her with strength in the lists,
And wel I woot, withouten help or grace	And well I know, without help or grace
Of thee ne may my strengthe noght availle.	Of thee my strength can not avail.
Thanne help me, lord, tomorwe in my bataille,	Then help me, lord, tomorrow in my battle,
For thilke fyr that whilom brente thee,	For that same fire that once burned thee,
As wel as thilke fyr now brenneth me,	As well as that same fire now burns me,
And do that I tomorwe have victorie.	And bring it about so that I have victory tomorrow.
Myn be the travaille, and thyn be the glorie!	Mine be the labor, and thine be the glory!
Thy sovereyn temple wol I moost honouren	I will most honor thy most excellent temple
Of any place, and alwey moost labouren	Over any place, and always most labor
In thy plesaunce and in thy craftes stronge,	In thy pleasure and in thy strong crafts,
And in thy temple I wol my baner honge	And in thy temple I will hang my banner
And alle the armes of my compaignye,	And all the arms of my company,
And everemo, unto that day I dye,	And evermore, until that day I die,
Eterne fir I wol bifore thee fynde.	Eternal fire I will provide before thee (on your altar).
And eek to this avow I wol me bynde:	And also I will bind myself to this vow:
My beerd, myn heer, that hongeth long adoun,	My beard, my hair, that hangs long down,
That nevere yet ne felte offensioun	That never yet felt injury
Of rasour nor of shere, I wol thee yive,	Of razor nor of shears, I will give thee,
And ben thy trewe servant whil I lyve.	And be thy true servant while I live.
Now, lord, have routhe upon my sorwes soore;	Now, lord, have pity upon my painful sorrows;
Yif me [victorie]; I aske thee namoore."	Give me victory; I ask of thee no more."
The preyere stynt of Arcita the stronge,	The prayer of Arcite the strong stopped,
The rynges on the temple dore that honge,	The rings that hung on the temple door,
And eek the dores, clatereden ful faste,	And also the doors, clattered very fast,
Of which Arcita somwhat hym agaste.	Of which Arcite was somewhat afraid.
The fyres brenden upon the auter brighte	The fires upon the altar burned (so) brightly
That it gan al the temple for to lighte;	That it began to illuminate all the temple;
A sweete smel the ground anon up yaf,	A sweet smell the ground at once yielded up,
And Arcita anon his hand up haf,	And Arcite immediately raised up his hand,
And moore encens into the fyr he caste,	And he cast more incense into the fire,
With othere rytes mo; and atte laste	With more other rites; and at the last
The statue of Mars bigan his hauberk rynge,	The statue of Mars began to ring its coat of mail,
And with that soun he herde a murmurynge	And with that sound he heard a murmuring
Ful lowe and dym, and seyde thus, "Victorie!"	Very low and faint, that said thus, "Victory!"
For which he yaf to Mars honour and glorie.	For which he (Arcite) gave to Mars honor and glory.
And thus with joye and hope wel to fare	And thus with joy and hope to fare well
Arcite anon unto his in is fare,	Arcite at once is gone unto his lodging,
As fayn as fowel is of the brighte sonne.	As happy as a fowl is for the bright sun.
And right anon swich strif ther is bigonne,	And right away such strife there is begun,
For thilke grauntyng, in the hevene above,	Because of that same grant, in the heaven above,
Bitwixe Venus, the goddesse of love,	Between Venus, the goddess of love,
And Mars, the stierne god armypotente,	And Mars, the stern god powerful in arms,
That Juppiter was bisy it to stente,	That Jupiter was hard put to stop it,
Til that the pale Saturnus the colde,	Until the pale Saturn the hostile,
That knew so manye of aventures olde,	Who knew so many of old adventures,
Foond in his olde experience an art	Found in his old experience a plan
That he ful soone hath plesed every part.	That he full soon has pleased every side.
As sooth is seyd, elde hath greet avantage;	As is truly said, old age has a great advantage;
In elde is bothe wysdom and usage;	In old age is both wisdom and experience;
Men may the olde atrenne and noght atrede.	One can outrun the old but not outwit them.
Saturne anon, to stynten strif and drede,	Saturn anon, to stop strife and fear,
Al be it that it is agayn his kynde,	Although it is against his natural disposition,
Of al this strif he gan remedie fynde.	He found a remedy for all this strife.
"My deere doghter Venus," quod Saturne,	"My dear daughter Venus," said Saturn,
"My cours, that hath so wyde for to turne,	"My orbit, that has so wide (a course) to turn,
Hath moore power than woot any man.	Has more power than any man knows.
Myn is the drenchyng in the see so wan;	Mine is the drowning in the sea so dark;
Myn is the prison in the derke cote;	Mine is the imprisonment in the dark cell;
Myn is the stranglyng and hangyng by the throte,	Mine is the killing and hanging by the throat,
The murmure and the cherles rebellyng,	The murmur (of discontent) and the churls' rebelling,
The groynynge, and the pryvee empoysonyng;	The grumbling, and the secret poisoning;
I do vengeance and pleyn correccioun,	I exact vengeance and do full punishment,
Whil I dwelle in the signe of the leoun.	While I dwell in the (zodiacal) sign of the lion.
Myn is the ruyne of the hye halles,	Mine is the ruin of the high halls,
The fallynge of the toures and of the walles	The falling of the towers and of the walls
Upon the mynour or the carpenter.	Upon the miner or the carpenter.
I slow Sampsoun, shakynge the piler;	I slew Sampson, shaking the pillar;
And myne be the maladyes colde,	And mine are the cold maladies,
The derke tresons, and the castes olde;	The dark treasons, and the old plots;
My lookyng is the fader of pestilence.	My (astrological) aspect is the father of pestilence.
Now weep namoore; I shal doon diligence	Now weep no more; I shall do my diligence
That Palamon, that is thyn owene knyght,	So that Palamon, who is thine own knight,
Shal have his lady, as thou hast him hight.	Shall have his lady, as thou hast promised him.
Though Mars shal helpe his knyght, yet nathelees	Though Mars shall help his knight, yet nonetheless
Bitwixe yow ther moot be som tyme pees,	Between you there must be peace sometime,
Al be ye noght of o compleccioun,	Although you are not of one (the same) temperament,
That causeth al day swich divisioun.	Which daily causes such dissension.
I am thyn aiel, redy at thy wille;	I am thy grandfather, ready (to do) as you wish;
Weep now namoore; I wol thy lust fulfille."	Weep now no more; I will fulfill thy desire."
Now wol I stynten of the goddes above,	Now I will stop (speaking) of the gods above,
Of Mars, and of Venus, goddesse of love,	Of Mars, and of Venus, goddess of love,
And telle yow as pleynly as I kan	And tell you as plainly as I can
The grete effect, for which that I bygan.	The essential part, for which I began.
Greet was the feeste in Atthenes that day,	Great was the feast in Athens that day,
And eek the lusty seson of that May	And also the pleasing season of that May
Made every wight to been in swich plesaunce	Made every person to be in such delight
That al that Monday justen they and daunce,	That all that Monday they joust and dance,
And spenden it in Venus heigh servyse.	And spend that day in Venus's noble service.
But by the cause that they sholde ryse	But because they must rise
Eerly, for to seen the grete fight,	Early, to see the great fight,
Unto hir reste wenten they at nyght.	Unto their rest they went at nightfall.
And on the morwe, whan that day gan sprynge,	And in the morning, when day did spring,
Of hors and harneys noyse and claterynge	Noise and clattering of horses and armor
Ther was in hostelryes al aboute,	There was in hostelries all about,
And to the paleys rood ther many a route	And to the palace there rode many a company
Of lordes upon steedes and palfreys.	Of lords upon steeds and palfreys.
Ther maystow seen devisynge of harneys	There canst thou see preparation of armor
So unkouth and so riche, and wroght so weel	So exotic and so rich, and wrought so well
Of goldsmythrye, of browdynge, and of steel;	Of goldsmiths' works, of embroidery, and of steel;
The sheeldes brighte, testeres, and trappures,	The bright shields, horses' head-armor, and horse-armor,
Gold-hewen helmes, coats of mail, cote-armures;	Gold-colored helms, coats of mail, tunics with heraldic devices;
Lordes in parementz on hir courseres,	Lords in richly decorated robes on their coursers,
Knyghtes of retenue, and eek squieres	Knights of (their) retinues, and also squires
Nailynge the speres, and helmes bokelynge;	Nailing heads to the spear-shafts, and buckling helms;
Giggynge of sheeldes, with layneres lacynge --	Fitting the shields with straps, fastening with laces --
There as nede is they weren no thyng ydel;	Where it is needed they were not at all idle;
The fomy steedes on the golden brydel	The steeds frothing on the golden bridles
Gnawynge, and faste the armurers also	Gnawing, and fast the armorers also
With fyle and hamer prikynge to and fro;	With file and hammer are spurring to and fro;
Yemen on foote, and communes many oon	Yeomen on foot, and foot soldiers many a one
With shorte staves, thikke as they may goon;	With short staves, thick as they can go;
Pypes, trompes, nakers, clariounes,	Pipes, trumpets, kettle drums, bugles,
That in the bataille blowen blody sounes;	That blow bloody sounds in the battle;
The paleys ful of peple up and doun,	The palace full of people everywhere,
Heere thre, ther ten, holdynge hir questioun,	Here three, there ten, debating,
Dyvynynge of thise Thebane knyghtes two.	Conjecturing about these two Theban knights.
Somme seyden thus, somme seyde "it shal be so";	Some said thus, some said "it shall be so";
Somme helden with hym with the blake berd,	Some held with him with the black beard,
Somme with the balled, somme with the thikke herd;	Some with the bald, some with the thickly haired;
Somme seyde he looked grymme, and he wolde fighte:	Some said he looked grim, and he would fight:
"He hath a sparth of twenty pound of wighte."	"He has a battle-ax of twenty pounds of weight."
Thus was the halle ful of divynynge,	Thus was the hall full of conjecturing,
Longe after that the sonne gan to sprynge.	Long after the sun began to rise.
The grete Theseus, that of his sleep awaked	The great Theseus, who was awakened of his sleep
With mynstralcie and noyse that was maked,	By the music and noise that was made,
Heeld yet the chambre of his paleys riche	Remained yet in the chamber of his rich palace
Til that the Thebane knyghtes, bothe yliche	Until the Theban knights, both equally
Honured, were into the paleys fet.	Honored, were fetched into the palace.
Duc Theseus was at a wyndow set,	Duke Theseus was set at a window,
Arrayed right as he were a god in trone.	Arrayed exactly as if he were a god on a throne.
The peple preesseth thiderward ful soone	The people press thither full soon
Hym for to seen, and doon heigh reverence,	In order to see him, and to do great reverence,
And eek to herkne his heste and his sentence.	And also to hear his command and his decision.
An heraud on a scaffold made an "Oo!"	A herald on a scaffold made a "Ho!"
Til al the noyse of peple was ydo,	Until all the noise of people was done,
And whan he saugh the peple of noyse al stille,	And when he saw the people all still of noise,
Tho shewed he the myghty dukes wille:	Then showed he the mighty duke's will:
"The lord hath of his heigh discrecioun	"The lord has of his great sound judgment
Considered that it were destruccioun	Considered that it would be destruction
To gentil blood to fighten in the gyse	To gentle blood to fight in the manner
Of mortal bataille now in this emprise.	Of mortal battle now in this undertaking.
Wherfore, to shapen that they shal nat dye,	Wherefore, to arrange matters so that they shall not die,
He wol his firste purpos modifye.	He will modify his previous plan.
No man therfore, up peyne of los of lyf,	No man therefore, upon punishment of loss of life,
No maner shot, ne polax, ne short knyf	No sort of arrow, nor battle-axe, nor short knife
Into the lystes sende or thider brynge;	Send into the lists or bring there;
Ne short swerd, for to stoke with poynt bitynge,	Nor short sword, to stab with piercing point,
No man ne drawe, ne bere it by his syde.	May no man neither draw, nor bear it by his side.
Ne no man shal unto his felawe ryde	And no man shall ride at his opponent
But o cours with a sharpe ygrounde spere;	More than one course with a sharply honed spear;
Foyne, if hym list, on foote, hymself to were.	Let him thrust, if he wishes, on foot, to defend himself.
And he that is at meschief shal be take	And he who is at a disadvantage shall be taken
And noght slayn, but be broght unto the stake	And not slain, but be brought unto the stake
That shal ben ordeyned on either syde;	That shall be placed on either side;
But thider he shal by force, and there abyde.	But thither he must (go) by force, and remain there.
And if so falle the chieftayn be take	And if so happen that the chieftain be taken
On outher syde, or elles sleen his make,	On either side, or else should slay his opponent,
No lenger shal the turneiynge laste.	The tournament shall last no longer.
God spede you! Gooth forth and ley on faste!	God give you success! Go forth and lay on fast!
With long swerd and with mace fighteth youre fille.	With long sword and with mace fight your fill.
Gooth now youre wey; this is the lordes wille."	Go now on your way; this is the lord's will."
The voys of peple touchede the hevene,	The voice of people touched the heaven,
So loude cride they with murie stevene,	So loudly they cried with merry voices,
"God save swich a lord, that is so good	"God save such a lord, that is so good
He wilneth no destruccion of blood!"	He desires no destruction of blood!"
Up goon the trompes and the melodye,	Up go the trumpets and the melody,
And to the lystes rit the compaignye,	And to the lists rides the company,
By ordinance, thurghout the citee large,	In battle array, throughout all the city,
Hanged with clooth of gold, and nat with sarge.	Hung with cloth of gold, and not with serge.
Ful lik a lord this noble duc gan ryde,	Fully like a lord this noble duke did ride,
Thise two Thebans upon either syde,	These two Thebans upon either side,
And after rood the queene and Emelye,	And after rode the queen and Emelye,
And after that another compaignye	And after that another company
Of oon and oother, after hir degree.	One after another, according to their rank.
And thus they passen thurghout the citee,	And thus they pass throughout the city,
And to the lystes come they by tyme.	And they come to the lists in good time.
It nas nat of the day yet fully pryme	It was not yet fully prime (nine a.m.) of the day
Whan set was Theseus ful riche and hye,	When Theseus was set very splendidly and nobly,
Ypolita the queene, and Emelye,	Ypolita the queen, and Emelye,
And othere ladys in degrees aboute.	And other ladies about in tiers.
Unto the seetes preesseth al the route.	Unto the seats press all the crowd.
And westward, thurgh the gates under Marte,	And westward, through the gates under Mars,
Arcite, and eek the hondred of his parte,	Arcite, and also the hundred of his party,
With baner reed is entred right anon;	With red banner is entered right away;
And in that selve moment Palamon	And in that same moment Palamon
Is under Venus, estward in the place,	Is under Venus, eastward in the place,
With baner whyt and hardy chiere and face.	With white banner and hardy countenance and face.
In al the world, to seken up and doun,	In all the world, to seek up and down,
So evene, withouten variacioun,	So evenly, without variation,
Ther nere swiche compaignyes tweye,	There were not two such companies,
For ther was noon so wys that koude seye	For there was no one so wise that could say
That any hadde of oother avauntage	That any one had advantage over the other
Of worthynesse, ne of estaat, ne age,	In worthiness, nor in status, nor age,
So evene were they chosen, for to gesse.	So evenly were they chosen, as I estimate.
And in two renges faire they hem dresse.	And in two fair ranks they arrange themselves.
Whan that hir names rad were everichon,	When every one of their names were read,
That in hir nombre gyle were ther noon,	So that in their total number there would be no deception,
Tho were the gates shet, and cried was loude:	Then the gates were shut, and cried was aloud:
"Do now youre devoir, yonge knyghtes proude!"	"Do now your duty, proud young knights!"
The heraudes lefte hir prikyng up and doun;	The heralds left their spurring up and down;
Now ryngen trompes loude and clarioun.	Now trumpets and bugles ring loud.
Ther is namoore to seyn, but west and est	There is no more to say, but from west and east
In goon the speres ful sadly in arrest;	In go the spears very firmly in the lance-rests;
In gooth the sharpe spore into the syde.	In goes the sharp spur into the flank.
Ther seen men who kan juste and who kan ryde;	There people see who can joust and who can ride;
Ther shyveren shaftes upon sheeldes thikke;	There splinter spears upon thick shields;
He feeleth thurgh the herte-spoon the prikke.	He feels the stabbing through the breast-bone.
Up spryngen speres twenty foot on highte;	Up spring spears twenty foot on height;
Out goon the swerdes as the silver brighte;	Out go the swords bright as silver;
The helmes they tohewen and toshrede;	The helms they hew to pieces and cut into shreds
Out brest the blood with stierne stremes rede;	Out burst the blood in strong red streams;
With myghty maces the bones they tobreste.	With mighty maces they break the bones to pieces.
He thurgh the thikkeste of the throng gan threste;	He did thrust through the thickest of the throng;
Ther stomblen steedes stronge, and doun gooth al,	There strong steeds stumble, and down goes all,
He rolleth under foot as dooth a bal;	He rolls under foot as does a ball;
He foyneth on his feet with his tronchoun,	On his feet he stabs with the broken shaft of his spear,
And he hym hurtleth with his hors adoun;	And he hurtles him down with his horse;
He thurgh the body is hurt and sithen ytake,	He is hurt through the body and then taken,
Maugree his heed, and broght unto the stake;	Despite all he can do, and brought unto the stake;
As forward was, right there he moste abyde.	As was the agreement, right there he must abide.
Another lad is on that oother syde.	Another on that other side is led away.
And some tyme dooth hem Theseus to reste,	And for a while Theseus makes them rest,
Hem to refresshe and drynken, if hem leste.	To refresh themselves and drink, if they wish.
Ful ofte a day han thise Thebanes two	Many times these two Thebans have
Togydre ymet, and wroght his felawe wo;	Met together, and (each) wrought woe to his opponent;
Unhorsed hath ech oother of hem tweye.	Each has unhorsed the other of them two.
Ther nas no tygre in the vale of Galgopheye,	There was not any tiger in the vale of Gargaphia,
Whan that hir whelp is stole whan it is lite,	When her whelp is stolen when it is little,
So crueel on the hunte as is Arcite	So cruel on the hunt as is Arcite
For jelous herte upon this Palamon.	For jealous heart upon this Palamon.
Ne in Belmarye ther nys so fel leon,	Nor in Benmarin there is not so fierce a lion,
That hunted is, or for his hunger wood,	That is hunted, or maddened by his hunger,
Ne of his praye desireth so the blood,	Nor of his prey desires so the blood,
As Palamon to sleen his foo Arcite.	As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite.
The jelous strokes on hir helmes byte;	The fervent strokes bite on their helms;
Out renneth blood on bothe hir sydes rede.	Out runs red blood on both their sides.
Som tyme an ende ther is of every dede.	Some time there is an end of every deed.
For er the sonne unto the reste wente,	For before the sun went unto its rest,
The stronge kyng Emetreus gan hente	The strong king Emetreus did seize
This Palamon, as he faught with Arcite,	This Palamon, as he fought with Arcite,
And made his swerd depe in his flessh to byte,	And made his sword deep in his flesh to bite,
And by the force of twenty is he take	And by the force of twenty he (Palamon) is taken
Unyolden, and ydrawen to the stake.	Without having surrendered, and dragged to the stake.
And in the rescus of this Palamoun	And in the rescue of this Palamon
The stronge kyng Lygurge is born adoun,	The strong king Lygurge is born down,
And kyng Emetreus, for al his strengthe,	And king Emetreus, despite all his strength,
Is born out of his sadel a swerdes lengthe,	Is carried out of his saddle a sword's length,
So hitte him Palamoun er he were take.	So hit him Palamon before he was taken.
But al for noght; he was broght to the stake.	But all for naught; he was brought to the stake.
His hardy herte myghte hym helpe naught:	His hardy heart could not help him:
He moste abyde, whan that he was caught,	He must abide, when he was caught,
By force and eek by composicioun.	By force and also by the agreed terms of battle.
Who sorweth now but woful Palamoun,	Who sorrows now but woeful Palamon,
That moot namoore goon agayn to fighte?	That must no more go again to fight?
And whan that Theseus hadde seyn this sighte,	And when Theseus had seen this sight,
Unto the folk that foghten thus echon	Unto each one of the folk that fought thus
He cryde, "Hoo! namoore, for it is doon!	He cried, "Stop! no more, for it is done!
I wol be trewe juge, and no partie.	I will be true judge, and no partisan.
Arcite of Thebes shal have Emelie,	Arcite of Thebes shall have Emelye,
That by his fortune hath hire faire ywonne."	Who by his fortune has won her fairly."
Anon ther is a noyse of peple bigonne	Immediately there is a noise of people begun
For joye of this, so loude and heighe withalle	For joy of this, so loud and clamorous indeed
It semed that the lystes sholde falle.	It seemed that the lists should fall.
What kan now faire Venus doon above?	What now can fair Venus do above?
What seith she now? What dooth this queene of love,	What says she now? What does this queen of love,
But wepeth so, for wantynge of hir wille,	But weeps so, for lack of (having) her will,
Til that hir teeres in the lystes fille?	Until her tears fell in the lists?
She seyde, "I am ashamed, doutelees."	She said, "I am disgraced, doubtless."
Saturnus seyde, "Doghter, hoold thy pees!	Saturn said, "Daughter, hold thy peace!
Mars hath his wille, his knyght hath al his boone,	Mars has his will, his knight has all his request,
And, by myn heed, thow shalt been esed soone."	And, by my head, thou shalt be relieved soon."
The trompours, with the loude mynstralcie,	The trumpeters, with the loud music,
The heraudes, that ful loude yelle and crie,	The heralds, who full loudly yell and cry,
Been in hire wele for joye of daun Arcite.	Are in their happiest state for joy of dan Arcite.
But herkneth me, and stynteth noyse a lite,	But listen to me, and stop the noise for a little,
Which a myracle ther bifel anon.	(Hear) what a miracle at once befell there.
This fierse Arcite hath of his helm ydon,	This fierce Arcite has taken off his helm,
And on a courser, for to shewe his face,	And on a war horse, to show his face,
He priketh endelong the large place	He spurs from one end to the other of the large open space
Lokynge upward upon this Emelye;	Looking upward upon this Emelye;
And she agayn hym caste a freendlich ye	And she to him cast a friendly eye
(For wommen, as to speken in comune,	(For women, so to speak in general,
Thei folwen alle the favour of Fortune)	They all follow the favor of Fortune)
And was al his chiere, as in his herte.	And was all his source of pleasure, in his heart.
Out of the ground a furie infernal sterte,	Out of the ground leaped an infernal fury,
From Pluto sent at requeste of Saturne,	Sent from Pluto at the request of Saturn,
For which his hors for fere gan to turne,	For which his horse for fear began to turn,
And leep aside, and foundred as he leep;	And leaped aside, and stumbled as he leaped;
And er that Arcite may taken keep,	And before Arcite can take heed,
He pighte hym on the pomel of his heed,	He hit himself on the top of his head,
That in the place he lay as he were deed,	That in the place he lay as if he were dead,
His brest tobrosten with his sadel-bowe.	His breast shattered by his saddlebow.
As blak he lay as any cole or crowe,	He lay as black as any coal or crow,
So was the blood yronnen in his face.	The blood was so run in his face.
Anon he was yborn out of the place,	Immediately he was carried out of the place,
With herte soor, to Theseus paleys.	With painful heart, to Theseus's palace.
Tho was he korven out of his harneys	Then was he cut out of his armor
And in a bed ybrought ful faire and blyve,	And brought in a bed very gently and quickly,
For he was yet in memorie and alyve,	For he was yet conscious and alive,
And alwey criynge after Emelye.	And always crying for Emelye.
Duc Theseus, with al his compaignye,	Duke Theseus, with all his company,
Is comen hoom to Atthenes his citee,	Is come home to Athens, his city,
With alle blisse and greet solempnitee.	With all bliss and great solemnity.
Al be it that this aventure was falle,	Although this accident had happened,
He nolde noght disconforten hem alle.	He would not distress them all.
Men seyde eek that Arcite shal nat dye;	People said also that Arcite shall not dye;
He shal been heeled of his maladye.	He shall be healed of his injuries.
And of another thyng they weren as fayn,	And of another thing they were as happy,
That of hem alle was ther noon yslayn,	That of them all there was no one slain,
Al were they soore yhurt, and namely oon,	Although they (were) sorely hurt, and especially one,
That with a spere was thirled his brest boon.	Whose breastbone was pierced by a spear.
To othere woundes and to broken armes	To other wounds and to broken arms
Somme hadden salves, and somme hadden charmes;	Some had salves, and some had charms;
Fermacies of herbes, and eek save	Medicines made of herbs, and also of sage
They dronken, for they wolde hir lymes have.	They drank, for they wanted to have their limbs cured.
For which this noble duc, as he wel kan,	For which this noble duke, as he well knows how,
Conforteth and honoureth every man,	Comforts and honors every man,
And made revel al the longe nyght	And made revel all the long night
Unto the straunge lordes, as was right.	For the foreign lords, as was right.
Ne ther was holden no disconfitynge	Nor was it considered any defeat (in battle)
But as a justes or a tourneiynge;	But (only) as a joust or a tournament;
For soothly ther was no disconfiture.	For truly there was no defeat.
For fallyng nys nat but an aventure,	For falling is nothing but an accident,
Ne to be lad by force unto the stake	Nor to be led by force unto the stake
Unyolden, and with twenty knyghtes take,	Without having surrendered, and taken by twenty knights,
O persone allone, withouten mo,	One person alone, without others,
And haryed forth by arme, foot, and too,	And dragged forth by arm, foot, and toe,
And eke his steede dryven forth with staves	And also his steed driven forth with staves
With footmen, bothe yemen and eek knaves --	By men on foot, both yeomen and also foot soldiers --
It nas arretted hym no vileynye;	He incurred no shameful blame for it;
Ther may no man clepen it cowardye.	No man there may call it cowardice.
For which anon duc Theseus leet crye,	For which anon duke Theseus had proclaimed,
To stynten alle rancour and envye,	To put a stop to all rancor and ill-will,
The gree as wel of o syde as of oother,	The victory (is given) as well to one side as to the other,
And eyther syde ylik as ootheres brother;	And either side equal as the other's brother;
And yaf hem yiftes after hir degree,	And gave them gifts in accordance with their ranks,
And fully heeld a feeste dayes three,	And held a feast for fully three days,
And conveyed the kynges worthily	And honorably escorted the kings
Out of his toun a journee largely.	Out of his town a full day's journey.
And hoom wente every man the righte way.	And home went every man the direct way.
Ther was namoore but "Fare wel, have good day!"	There was no more but "Fare well, have good day!"
Of this bataille I wol namoore endite,	Of this battle I will write no more,
But speke of Palamon and of Arcite.	But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.
Swelleth the brest of Arcite, and the soore	The breast of Arcite swells, and the pain
Encreesseth at his herte moore and moore.	At his heart increases more and more.
The clothered blood, for any lechecraft,	The clotted blood, despite any medical treatment,
Corrupteth, and is in his bouk ylaft,	Corrupts, and is left in the trunk of his body,
That neither veyne-blood, ne ventusynge,	That neither blood letting at a vein, nor applying suction cups,
Ne drynke of herbes may ben his helpynge.	Nor drink of herbs can be any help to him.
The vertu expulsif, or animal,	The power expulsive (to expel fluids), or animal,
Fro thilke vertu cleped natural	From that power called natural
Ne may the venym voyden ne expelle.	Can not remove nor expel the poison.
The pipes of his longes gonne to swelle,	The pipes of his lungs began to swell,
And every lacerte in his brest adoun	And every muscle down in his breast
Is shent with venym and corrupcioun.	Is destroyed by poison and corrupted matter.
Hym gayneth neither, for to gete his lif,	Avails him neither, to preserve his life,
Vomyt upward, ne dounward laxatif.	Vomit upward, nor downward laxative.
Al is tobrosten thilke regioun;	All is shattered in that region;
Nature hath now no dominacioun.	Nature now has no power to control.
And certeinly, ther Nature wol nat wirche,	And certainly, where Nature will not work,
Fare wel phisik! Go ber the man to chirche!	Fare well medicine! Go bear the man to church!
This al and som, that Arcita moot dye;	This is the whole of it, that Arcite must die;
For which he sendeth after Emelye,	For which he sends after Emelye,
And Palamon, that was his cosyn deere.	And Palamon, who was his dear cousin.
Thanne seyde he thus, as ye shal after heere:	Then said he thus, as you shall after hear:
"Naught may the woful spirit in myn herte	"The woeful spirit in my heart can not
Declare o point of alle my sorwes smerte	Declare one small part of all my painful sorrows
To yow, my lady, that I love moost,	To you, my lady, whom I love most,
But I biquethe the servyce of my goost	But I bequeath the service of my ghost
To yow aboven every creature,	To you above every creature,
Syn that my lyf may no lenger dure.	Since my life can no longer endure.
Allas, the wo! Allas, the peynes stronge,	Alas, the woe! Alas, the strong pains,
That I for yow have suffred, and so longe!	That I have suffered for you, and so long!
Allas, the deeth! Allas, myn Emelye!	Alas, the death! Alas, my Emelye!
Allas, departynge of oure compaignye!	Alas, separation of our company!
Allas, myn hertes queene! Allas, my wyf,	Alas, my heart's queen! Alas, my wife,
Myn hertes lady, endere of my lyf!	My heart's lady, ender of my life!
What is this world? What asketh men to have?	What is this world? What do people ask to have?
Now with his love, now in his colde grave	Now with his love, now in his cold grave
Allone, withouten any compaignye.	Alone, without any company.
Fare wel, my sweete foo, myn Emelye!	Fare well, my sweet foe, my Emelye!
And softe taak me in youre armes tweye,	And softly take me in your two arms,
For love of God, and herkneth what I seye.	For love of God, and listen to what I say.
"I have heer with my cosyn Palamon	"I have here with my cousin Palamon
Had strif and rancour many a day agon	Had strife and rancor many a day ago
For love of yow, and for my jalousye.	For love of you, and for my jealousy.
And Juppiter so wys my soule gye,	And as Jupiter may guide my soul,
To speken of a servaunt proprely,	To speak specifically of a servant (of love),
With alle circumstances trewely --	With all the attendant attributes truly --
That is to seyen, trouthe, honour, knyghthede,	That is to say, truth, honor, knighthood,
Wysdom, humblesse, estaat, and heigh kynrede,	Wisdom, humbleness, rank, and noble ancestry,
Fredom, and al that longeth to that art --	Nobility of character, and all that belongs to that art --
So Juppiter have of my soule part,	As Jupiter may have concern for my soul,
As in this world right now ne knowe I non	In this world right now I know no one
So worthy to ben loved as Palamon,	So worthy to be loved as Palamon,
That serveth yow, and wol doon al his lyf.	Who serves you, and will do so all his life.
And if that evere ye shul ben a wyf,	And if ever you shall be a wife,
Foryet nat Palamon, the gentil man."	Forget not Palamon, the gentle man."
And with that word his speche faille gan,	And with that word his speech began to fail,
For from his feet up to his brest was come	For from his feet up to his breast had come
The coold of deeth, that hadde hym overcome,	The cold of death, which had overcome him,
And yet mooreover, for in his armes two	And yet moreover, for in his two arms
The vital strengthe is lost and al ago.	The vital strength is lost and all gone.
Oonly the intellect, withouten moore,	Only the intellect, nothing else,
That dwelled in his herte syk and soore,	That dwelled in his heart sick and sore,
Gan faillen whan the herte felte deeth.	Began to fail when the heart felt death.
Dusked his eyen two, and failled breeth,	His two eyes grew dark, and his breath failed,
But on his lady yet caste he his ye;	But on his lady yet he cast his eye;
His laste word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"	His last word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"
His spirit chaunged hous and wente ther,	His spirit changed house and went where,
As I cam nevere, I kan nat tellen wher.	Since I came never (there), I can not tell where.
Therfore I stynte; I nam no divinistre;	Therefore I stop; I am no theologian;
Of soules fynde I nat in this registre,	I find nothing about souls in this register,
Ne me ne list thilke opinions to telle	Nor do I wish to tell such beliefs
Of hem, though that they writen wher they dwelle.	Of them, though they write of where they (the souls) dwell.
Arcite is coold, ther Mars his soule gye!	Arcite is cold, may Mars guide his soul!
Now wol I speken forth of Emelye.	Now will I speak forth of Emelye.
Shrighte Emelye, and howleth Palamon,	Emelye shrieked, and Palamon howls,
And Theseus his suster took anon	And Theseus immediately took his sister
Swownynge, and baar hire fro the corps away.	Swooning, and carried her away from the corpse.
What helpeth it to tarien forth the day	What helps it to waste the whole day
To tellen how she weep bothe eve and morwe?	To tell how she wept both evening and morning?
For in swich cas wommen have swich sorwe,	For in such cases women have such sorrow,
Whan that hir housbondes ben from hem ago,	When their husbands are gone from them,
That for the moore part they sorwen so,	That for the most part they so sorrow,
Or ellis fallen in swich maladye	Or else fall in such illness
That at the laste certeinly they dye.	That at the last certainly they die.
Infinite been the sorwes and the teeres	Infinite are the sorrows and the tears
Of olde folk and folk of tendre yeeres	Of old folk and folk of tender years
In al the toun for deeth of this Theban.	In all the town for the death of this Theban.
For hym ther wepeth bothe child and man;	For him there weep both child and man;
So greet wepyng was ther noon, certayn,	There was no such great weeping, certainly,
Whan Ector was ybroght, al fressh yslayn,	When Hector was brought, just recently slain,
To Troye. Allas, the pitee that was ther,	To Troy. Alas, the lamentation that was there,
Cracchynge of chekes, rentynge eek of heer.	Scratching of cheeks, also tearing of hair.
"Why woldestow be deed," thise wommen crye,	"Why wouldst thou be dead," these women cry,
"And haddest gold ynough, and Emelye?"	"Since thou haddest gold enough, and Emelye?"
No man myghte gladen Theseus,	No man might comfort Theseus,
Savynge his olde fader Egeus,	Except for his old father Egeus,
That knew this worldes transmutacioun,	Who knew the changes of this world,
As he hadde seyn it chaunge bothe up and doun,	As he had seen it change both up and down,
Joye after wo, and wo after gladnesse,	Joy after woe, and woe after gladness,
And shewed hem ensamples and liknesse.	And showed them examples and comparisons.
"Right as ther dyed nevere man," quod he,	"Right as there died never a man," said he,
"That he ne lyvede in erthe in some degree,	"Who did not live in earth to some extent
Right so ther lyvede never man," he seyde,	Just so there lived never a man," he said,
"In al this world, that som tyme he ne deyde.	"In all this world, who some time did not die.
This world nys but a thurghfare ful of wo,	This world is nothing but a thoroughfare full of woe,
And we been pilgrymes, passynge to and fro.	And we are pilgrims, passing to and fro.
Deeth is an ende of every worldly soore."	Death is an end of every worldly pain."
And over al this yet seyde he muchel moore	And beyond all this yet he said much more
To this effect, ful wisely to enhorte	To this effect, full wisely to exhort
The peple that they sholde hem reconforte.	The people that they should comfort themselves.
Duc Theseus, with al his bisy cure,	Duke Theseus, with all his careful attention,
Caste now wher that the sepulture	Considered now where the tomb
Of goode Arcite may best ymaked be,	Of good Arcite may best be made,
And eek moost honurable in his degree.	And also most honorable in (regard to) his rank.
And at the laste he took conclusioun	And at the last he concluded
That ther as first Arcite and Palamoun	That there where first Arcite and Palamon
Hadden for love the bataille hem bitwene,	Had the battle between them for love,
That in that selve grove, swoote and grene,	That in that same grove, sweet-smelling and green,
Ther as he hadde his amorouse desires,	Where he had his amorous desires,
His compleynte, and for love his hoote fires,	His lament, and for love his hot fires,
He wolde make a fyr in which the office	He would make a fire in which the rite
Funeral he myghte al accomplice.	Of a funeral he might fully perform.
And leet comande anon to hakke and hewe	And he ordered immediately to hack and hew
The okes olde, and leye hem on a rewe	The old oaks, and lay them in a row
In colpons wel arrayed for to brenne.	In piles arranged to burn well.
His officers with swifte feet they renne	His officers with swift feet they run
And ryde anon at his comandement.	And ride quickly at his commandment.
And after this, Theseus hath ysent	And after this, Theseus has sent
After a beere, and it al overspradde	For a bier, and it all overspread
With clooth of gold, the richeste that he hadde.	With cloth of gold, the richest that he had.
And of the same suyte he cladde Arcite;	And of the same material he clad Arcite;
Upon his hondes hadde he gloves white,	Upon his hands he had white gloves,
Eek on his heed a coroune of laurer grene,	Also on his head a crown of green laurel,
And in his hond a swerd ful bright and kene.	And in his hand a sword full bright and keen.
He leyde hym, bare the visage, on the beere;	He laid him, with the face bare, on the bier;
Therwith he weep that pitee was to heere.	Therewith he wept that it was a pity to hear.
And for the peple sholde seen hym alle,	And in order that all the people should see him,
Whan it was day, he broghte hym to the halle,	When it was day, he brought him to the hall,
That roreth of the criyng and the soun.	That resounds with the crying and the sound.
Tho cam this woful Theban Palamoun,	Then came this woeful Theban Palamon,
With flotery berd and ruggy, asshy heeres,	With waving beard and rough hair sprinkled with ashes,
In clothes blake, ydropped al with teeres;	In black clothes, all sprinkled with tears;
And, passynge othere of wepynge, Emelye,	And, excelling others in weeping, Emelye,
The rewefulleste of al the compaignye.	The most pitiful of all the company.
In as muche as the servyce sholde be	In order that the ritual should be
The moore noble and riche in his degree,	The more noble and rich in its degree,
Duc Theseus leet forth thre steedes brynge,	Duke Theseus had three steeds brought forth,
That trapped were in steel al gliterynge,	That were equipped with trappings of steel all glittering,
And covered with the armes of daun Arcite.	And covered with the coat of arms of Don Arcite.
Upon thise steedes, that weren grete and white,	Upon these steeds, that were large and white,
Ther seten folk, of whiche oon baar his sheeld,	There sat folk, of which one carried his (Arcite's) shield,
Another his spere up on his hondes heeld,	Another held his spear upright in his hands,
The thridde baar with hym his bowe Turkeys	The third carried with him his Turkish bow
(Of brend gold was the caas and eek the harneys);	(Of pure gold was the quiver and also the fittings);
And riden forth a paas with sorweful cheere	And they rode forth slowly with sorrowful demeanor
Toward the grove, as ye shul after heere.	Toward the grove, as you shall later hear.
The nobleste of the Grekes that ther were	The noblest of the Greeks that were there
Upon hir shuldres caryeden the beere,	Carried the bier upon their shoulders,
With slakke paas and eyen rede and wete,	With slow pace and eyes red and wet,
Thurghout the citee by the maister strete,	Throughout the city by the main street,
That sprad was al with blak, and wonder hye	Which was all spread with black, and wonderfully high
Right of the same is the strete ywrye.	The street is covered with exactly the same.
Upon the right hond wente olde Egeus,	Upon the right hand went old Egeus,
And on that oother syde duc Theseus,	And on that other side duke Theseus,
With vessels in hir hand of gold ful fyn,	With vessels of pure gold in their hands,
Al ful of hony, milk, and blood, and wyn;	All full of honey, milk, and blood, and wine;
Eek Palamon, with ful greet compaignye;	Also Palamon, with a very large company;
And after that cam woful Emelye,	And after that came woeful Emelye,
With fyr in honde, as was that tyme the gyse,	With fire in hand, as was at that time the custom,
To do the ritual of funeral service.	To do the office of funeral service.
Heigh labour and ful greet apparaillynge	Much labor and full great preparation
Was at the service and the fyr-makynge,	Was at the service and the fire-making,
That with his grene top the hevene raughte;	Which with its green top reached the heaven;
And twenty fadme of brede the armes straughte --	And twenty fathom of breadth the sides stretched --
This is to seyn, the bowes weren so brode.	This is to say, the boughs were so broad.
Of stree first ther was leyd ful many a lode.	There was first laid very many a load of straw.
But how the fyr was maked upon highte,	But how the fire was made on high,
Ne eek the names that the trees highte,	Nor also the names that the trees are called,
As ook, firre, birch, aspe, alder, holm, popler,	Such as oak, fir, birch, aspen, alder, holm oak, poplar,
Wylugh, elm, plane, assh, box, chasteyn, lynde, laurer,	Willow, elm, plane, ash, box, chestnut, linden, laurel,
Mapul, thorn, bech, hasel, ew, whippeltree --	Maple, thorn, beech, hazel, yew, dogwood --
How they weren feld shal nat be toold for me;	How they were cut down shall not be told by me;
Ne hou the goddes ronnen up and doun,	Nor how the gods ran up and down,
Disherited of hire habitacioun,	Disinherited of their habitation,
In which they woneden in reste and pees,	In which they dwelt in rest and peace,
Nymphes, fawnes and amadrides;	Nymphs, fawns and hamadryades (wood nymphs);
Ne hou the beestes and the briddes alle	Nor how the beasts and the birds all
Fledden for fere, whan the wode was falle;	Fled for fear, when the wood was cut down;
Ne how the ground agast was of the light,	Nor how frightened by the light was the ground,
That was nat wont to seen the sonne bright;	Which was not accustomed to see the bright sun;
Ne how the fyr was couched first with stree,	Nor how the fire was laid first with straw,
And thanne with drye stikkes cloven a thre,	And then with dry branches cut in thirds,
And thanne with grene wode and spicerye,	And then with green wood and mixtures of spices,
And thanne with clooth of gold and with perrye,	And then with cloth of gold and with precious stones
And gerlandes, hangynge with ful many a flour;	And garlands, hanging with full many a flower;
The mirre, th'encens, with al so greet odour;	The myrrh, the incense, with such great fragrance;
Ne how Arcite lay among al this,	Nor how Arcite lay among all this,
Ne what richesse aboute his body is;	Nor what richness about his body is;
Ne how that Emelye, as was the gyse,	Nor how Emelye, as was the custom,
Putte in the fyr of funeral servyse;	Lighted the fire of funeral service;
Ne how she swowned whan men made the fyr,	Nor how she swooned when men made the fire,
Ne what she spak, ne what was hir desir;	Nor what she spoke, nor what was her desire;
Ne what jeweles men in the fyre caste,	Nor what jewels men threw in the fire,
Whan that the fyr was greet and brente faste;	When the fire was great and burned fast;
Ne how somme caste hir sheeld, and somme hir spere,	Nor how some threw their shields, and some their spears,
And of hire vestimentz, whiche that they were,	And of their vestments, which they wore,
And coppes fulle of wyn, and milk, and blood,	And cups full of wine, and milk, and blood,
Into the fyr, that brente as it were wood;	Into the fire, that burned as if it were mad;
Ne how the Grekes, with an huge route,	Nor how the Greeks, with a huge company,
Thries riden al the fyr aboute	Thrice ride all the fire about
Upon the left hand, with a loud shoutynge,	Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,
And thries with hir speres claterynge;	And thrice with their spears clattering;
And thries how the ladyes gonne crye;	And thrice how the ladies did cry;
And how that lad was homward Emelye;	And how Emelye was led homeward;
Ne how Arcite is brent to asshen colde;	Nor how Arcite is burned to cold ashes;
Ne how that lyche-wake was yholde	Nor how that wake was held
Al thilke nyght; ne how the Grekes pleye	All that same night; nor how the Greeks play
The wake-pleyes; ne kepe I nat to seye	The funeral games I care not to say
Who wrastleth best naked with oille enoynt,	Who wrestles best, naked with oil anointed,
Ne who that baar hym best, in no disjoynt.	Nor who bore him best, in any difficulty.
I wol nat tellen eek how that they goon	I will not tell also how they go
Hoom til Atthenes, whan the pley is doon;	Home to Athens, when the games are done;
But shortly to the point thanne wol I wende	But shortly to the point then I will go
And maken of my longe tale an ende.	And make an end of my long tale.
By processe and by lengthe of certeyn yeres,	By the course of events and by length of a certain number of years,
Al stynted is the moornynge and the teres	All stopped is the mourning and the tears
Of Grekes, by oon general assent.	Of the Greeks, by one general assent.
Thanne semed me ther was a parlement	Then it seemed to me there was a parliament
At Atthenes, upon certein pointz and caas;	At Athens, upon certain topics and cases;
Among the whiche pointz yspoken was,	Among which topics was discussed (a proposal)
To have with certein contrees alliaunce,	To have alliance with certain countries,
And have fully of Thebans obeisaunce.	And have fully the submission of the Thebans.
For which this noble Theseus anon	For which this noble Theseus immediately
Leet senden after gentil Palamon,	Ordered (someone) to send for gentle Palamon,
Unwist of hym what was the cause and why,	Unknown by him (Palamon) what was the cause and why,
But in his blake clothes sorwefully	But in his black clothes sorrowfully
He cam at his comandement in hye.	He came at his (Theseus's) commandment in haste.
Tho sente Theseus for Emelye.	Then Theseus sent for Emelye.
Whan they were set, and hust was al the place,	When they were set, and all the place was hushed,
And Theseus abiden hadde a space	And Theseus had waited for a while
Er any word cam fram his wise brest,	Before any word came from his wise breast,
His eyen sette he ther as was his lest.	He set his eyes where his object of desire was.
And with a sad visage he siked stille,	And with a sad face he sighed softly,
And after that right thus he seyde his wille:	And after that exactly thus he pronounced his decision:
"The Firste Moevere of the cause above,	"The First Mover of the First Cause above,
Whan he first made the faire cheyne of love,	When he first made the faire chain of love,
Greet was th'effect, and heigh was his entente.	Great was the effect, and noble was his plan.
Wel wiste he why, and what thereof he mente,	Well knew he why, and what thereof he meant,
For with that faire cheyne of love he bond	For with that faire chain of love he bound
The fyr, the eyr, the water, and the lond	The fire, the air, the water, and the land
In certeyn boundes, that they may nat flee.	In definite bounds, from which they may not flee.
That same Prince and that Moevere," quod he,	That same Prince and that Mover," said he,
"Hath stablissed in this wrecched world adoun	"Has established in this wretched world below
Certeyne dayes and duracioun	Specific (numbers of) days and (term of) duration
To al that is engendred in this place,	To all that is engendered in this place,
Over the whiche day they may nat pace,	Beyond the which day they can not pass,
Al mowe they yet tho dayes wel abregge.	Although they may yet well shorten those days.
Ther nedeth noght noon auctoritee t'allegge,	There is no need to cite any written authority,
For it is preeved by experience,	For it is proven by experience,
But that me list declaren my sentence.	Unless I wish to make my meaning more clear.
Thanne may men by this ordre wel discerne	Then one can by this order well discern
That thilke Moevere stable is and eterne.	That that same Mover is stable and eternal.
Wel may men knowe, but it be a fool,	Well may one know, unless it be a fool,
That every part dirryveth from his hool,	That every part derives from its whole,
For nature hath nat taken his bigynnyng	For nature has not taken its beginning
Of no partie or cantel of a thyng,	Of no part or portion of a thing,
But of a thyng that parfit is and stable,	But of a thing that is complete and stable,
Descendynge so til it be corrumpable.	Descending (from that) until it becomes corruptible.
And therfore, of his wise purveiaunce,	And therefore, by his wise foresight,
He hath so wel biset his ordinaunce	He has so well established his plan
That speces of thynges and progressiouns	That types of being and natural processes
Shullen enduren by successiouns,	Shall endure (for a set time) one after another,
And nat eterne, withouten any lye.	And not eternally, without any lie.
This maystow understonde and seen at ye.	This thou canst understand and plainly see.
"Loo the ook, that hath so long a norisshynge	"Lo the oak, that is so slow to mature,
From tyme that it first bigynneth to sprynge,	From the time that it first begins to spring,
And hath so long a lif, as we may see,	And has so long a life, as we may see,
Yet at the laste wasted is the tree.	Yet at the last the tree is wasted away.
"Considereth eek how that the harde stoon	"Consider also how the hard stone
Under oure feet, on which we trede and goon,	Under our feet, on which we tread and go,
Yet wasteth it as it lyth by the weye.	Eventually it is worn away as it lies by the way.
The brode ryver somtyme wexeth dreye;	The broad river sometimes grows dry;
The grete tounes se we wane and wende.	We see the great cities grow weak and pass away.
Thanne may ye se that al this thyng hath ende.	Then you can see that all things have an end.
"Of man and womman seen we wel also	"Of man and woman also we see well
That nedes, in oon of thise termes two --	That by necessity, in one of these two periods of time --
This is to seyn, in youthe or elles age --	This is to say, in youth or else in age --
He moot be deed, the kyng as shal a page;	He must be dead, the king as must a servant boy;
Som in his bed, som in the depe see,	One in his bed, one in the deep sea,
Som in the large feeld, as men may see;	One in the large field, as people can see;
Ther helpeth noght; al goth that ilke weye.	Nothing helps there; all goes that same way.
Thanne may I seyn that al this thyng moot deye.	Then may I say that all things must die.
"What maketh this but Juppiter, the kyng,	"What causes this but Jupiter, the king,
That is prince and cause of alle thyng,	Who is prince and cause of all things,
Convertynge al unto his propre welle	Causing all to return to its own origin
From which it is dirryved, sooth to telle?	From which it is derived, to tell the truth?
And heer-agayns no creature on lyve,	And against this no living creature,
Of no degree, availleth for to stryve.	Of any rank, is helped by striving.
"Thanne is it wysdom, as it thynketh me,	"Then is it wisdom, as it seems to me,
To maken vertu of necessitee,	To make virtue of necessity,
And take it weel that we may nat eschue,	And take it well what we may not escape,
And namely that to us alle is due.	And namely that which is due to us all.
And whoso gruccheth ought, he dooth folye,	And whoever complains in any way, he does folly,
And rebel is to hym that al may gye.	And is rebel to Him that can rule all.
And certeinly a man hath moost honour	And certainly a man has most honor
To dyen in his excellence and flour,	To die in his (time of) excellence and flower,
Whan he is siker of his goode name;	When he is sure of his good name;
Thanne hath he doon his freend, ne hym, no shame.	Then he has not done his friend, nor himself, any shame.
And gladder oghte his freend been of his deeth,	And his friend ought to be more pleased with his death,
Whan with honour up yolden is his breeth,	When his breath is yielded up with honor,
Than whan his name apalled is for age,	Than when his name is faded because of age,
For al forgeten is his vassellage.	For all forgotten is his knightly prowess.
Thanne is it best, as for a worthy fame,	Then is it best, for a worthy fame,
To dyen whan that he is best of name.	To die when he has the most fame.
"The contrarie of al this is wilfulnesse.	"The contrary of all this is willfulness.
Why grucchen we, why have we hevynesse,	Why do we complain, why do we have sadness,
That goode Arcite, of chivalrie flour,	That good Arcite, flower of chivalry,
Departed is with duetee and honour	Is departed with all due honor
Out of this foule prisoun of this lyf?	Out of this foul prison of this life?
Why grucchen heere his cosyn and his wyf	Why do his cousin and his wife complain here
Of his welfare, that loved hem so weel?	Of the welfare of him, who loved them so well?
Kan he hem thank? Nay, God woot, never a deel,	Can he show them his gratitude? Nay, God knows, not a bit;
That both his soule and eek hemself offende,	They offend both his soul and themselves as well,
And yet they mowe hir lustes nat amende.	And as yet they may not change their desires.
"What may I conclude of this longe serye,	"What can I conclude of this long argument,
But after wo I rede us to be merye	But after woe I advise us to be merry
And thanken Juppiter of al his grace?	And thank Jupiter for all his grace?
And er that we departen from this place	And before we depart from this place
I rede that we make of sorwes two	I advise that we make of two sorrows
O parfit joye, lastynge everemo.	One perfect joy, lasting evermore.
And looketh now, wher moost sorwe is herinne,	And look now, where most sorrow is herein,
Ther wol we first amenden and bigynne.	There will we first amend and begin.
"Suster," quod he, "this is my fulle assent,	"Sister," said he, "this is my full intention,
With al th'avys heere of my parlement,	With all the advice of my parliament here,
That gentil Palamon, youre owene knyght,	That gentle Palamon, your own knight,
That serveth yow with wille, herte, and myght,	Who serves you with will, heart, and might,
And ever hath doon syn ye first hym knewe,	And ever has done so since you first knew him,
That ye shul of youre grace upon hym rewe,	That you shall of your grace have pity upon him,
And taken hym for housbonde and for lord.	And take him for husband and for lord.
Lene me youre hond, for this is oure accord.	Lend me your hand, for this is our decision.
Lat se now of youre wommanly pitee.	Let your womanly pity now be seen.
He is a kynges brother sone, pardee;	He is a king's brother's son, indeed;
And though he were a povre bacheler,	And even if he were a poor young knight,
Syn he hath served yow so many a yeer,	Since he has served you so many a year,
And had for yow so greet adversitee,	And has had for you such great adversity,
It moste been considered, leeveth me,	It must be taken in account, believe me,
For gentil mercy oghte to passen right."	For gentle mercy ought to prevail over justice."
Thanne seyde he thus to Palamon the knight:	Then said he thus to Palamon the knight:
"I trowe ther nedeth litel sermonyng	"I suppose little preaching is needed here
To make yow assente to this thyng.	To make you assent to this thing.
Com neer, and taak youre lady by the hond."	Come near, and take your lady by the hand."
Bitwixen hem was maad anon the bond	Between them was made right away the bond
That highte matrimoigne or mariage,	That is called matrimony or marriage,
By al the conseil and the baronage.	By all the council and the baronage.
And thus with alle blisse and melodye	And thus with all bliss and festivity
Hath Palamon ywedded Emelye.	Palamon has wedded Emelye.
And God, that al this wyde world hath wroght,	And God, who has made all this wide world,
Sende hym his love that hath it deere aboght;	Send him his love who has dearly paid for it;
For now is Palamon in alle wele,	For now is Palamon in complete happiness,
Lyvynge in blisse, in richesse, and in heele,	Living in bliss, in riches, and in health,
And Emelye hym loveth so tendrely,	And Emelye loves him so tenderly,
And he hire serveth so gentilly,	And he serves her so gently,
That nevere was ther no word hem bitwene	That never was there any word between them
Of jalousie or any oother teene.	Of jealousy or any other vexation.
Thus endeth Palamon and Emelye;	Thus ends Palamon and Emelye;
And God save al this faire compaignye! Amen.	And God save all this fair company! Amen.
The murye Wordes of the Hoost to the Monk.	The merry words of the Host to the Monk.
Whan ended was my tale of Melibee,	When ended was my tale of Melibee,
And of Prudence and hire benignytee,	And of Prudence and her goodness,
Oure Hooste seyde, "As I am feithful man,	Our Host said, "On my faith,
And by that precious corpus Madrian,	And by that precious body of Madrian,
I hadde levere than a barel ale	(I swear that) I had rather than have a barrel of ale
That Goodelief, my wyf, hadde herd this tale!	That Goodelief, my wife, had heard this tale!
For she nys no thyng of swich pacience	For she is in no way of such patience
As was this Melibeus wyf Prudence.	As was this Melibeus' wife Prudence.
By Goddes bones, whan I bete my knaves,	By God's bones, when I beat my knaves,
She bryngeth me forth the grete clobbed staves,	She brings me forth the great knobby clubs,
And crieth, `Slee the dogges everichoon,	And cries, `Slay the dogs every one
And brek hem, bothe bak and every boon!'	And break them, both back and every bone!'
"And if that any neighebor of myne	"And if any neighbor of mine
Wol nat in chirche to my wyf enclyne,	Will not in church bow to my wife,
Or be so hardy to hire to trespace,	Or be so bold as to offend her,
Whan she comth hoom she rampeth in my face,	When she comes home she shakes her fists in my face,
And crieth, `False coward, wrek thy wyf!	And cries, `False coward, avenge thy wife!
By corpus bones, I wol have thy knyf,	By God's bones, I will have thy knife,
And thou shalt have my distaf and go spynne!'	And thou shalt have my spinning staff and go spin!'
Fro day to nyght right thus she wol bigynne.	From daybreak to nightfall right thus she will begin.
`Allas,' she seith, `that evere I was shape	`Alas,' she says, `that ever I was created
To wedden a milksop, or a coward ape,	To wed a milksop, or a coward ape,
That wol been overlad with every wight!	That will be browbeaten by every body!
Thou darst nat stonden by thy wyves right!'	Thou darest not defend thy wife's right!'
"This is my lif, but if that I wol fighte;	"This is my life, unless I will fight;
And out at dore anon I moot me dighte,	And out at door immediately I must hasten myself,
Or elles I am but lost, but if that I	Or else I am as good as lost, unless I
Be lik a wilde leoun, fool-hardy.	Be like a wild lion, fool-hardy.
I woot wel she wol do me slee som day	I know well some day she will make me slay
Som neighebor, and thanne go my way;	Some neighbor, and then be on the run;
For I am perilous with knyf in honde,	For I am perilous with knife in hand,
Al be it that I dar nat hire withstonde,	Albeit that I dare not stand up to her,
For she is byg in armes, by my feith:	For she is strong in fighting, by my faith:
That shal he fynde that hire mysdooth or seith --	That shall he find that does or says something amiss to her --
But lat us passe awey fro this mateere.	But let us pass away from this matter.
"My lord, the Monk," quod he, "be myrie of cheere,	"My lord, the Monk," said he, "cheer up,
For ye shul telle a tale trewely.	For you must tell a tale truly.
Loo, Rouchestre stant heer faste by!	Lo, Rochester stands here near by!
Ryde forth, myn owene lord, brek nat oure game.	Ride forth, my own lord, do not interrupt our game.
But, by my trouthe, I knowe nat youre name.	But, by my pledged word, I know not your name.
Wher shal I calle yow my lord daun John,	Which shall I call you -- my lord Don John,
Or daun Thomas, or elles daun Albon?	Or Don Thomas, or else Don Albon?
Of what hous be ye, by youre fader kyn?	Of what monastic order are you, by your father's kin?
I vowe to God, thou hast a ful fair skyn;	I vow to God, thou hast a very handsome complexion;
It is a gentil pasture ther thow goost.	It is a noble pasture where thou goest to eat.
Thou art nat lyk a penant or a goost:	Thou art not like a penitent or a ghost:
Upon my feith, thou art som officer,	Upon my faith, thou art some officer,
Som worthy sexteyn, or som celerer,	Some worthy sexton, or some provisioner,
For by my fader soule, as to my doom,	For by my father's soul, according to my judgment,
Thou art a maister whan thou art at hoom;	Thou art a master when thou art at home;
No povre cloysterer, ne no novys,	No poor cloistered monk, nor no novice,
But a governour, wily and wys,	But a governor, wily and wise,
And therwithal of brawnes and of bones	And, in addition to that, of muscles and of bones
A wel farynge persone for the nones.	A very handsome person indeed.
I pray to God, yeve hym confusioun	I pray to God, give him ruination
That first thee broghte unto religioun!	Who first brought thee unto the monastic life!
Thou woldest han been a tredefowel aright.	Thou wouldest have been a chicken-copulator indeed,
Haddestow as greet a leeve as thou hast myght	If thou haddest as much permission as thou hast power
To parfourne al thy lust in engendrure,	To perform all thy desire in procreation,
Thou haddest bigeten ful many a creature.	Thou would have begotten very many a creature.
Allas, why werestow so wyd a cope?	Alas, why wearest thou so wide a cope?
God yeve me sorwe, but, and I were a pope,	God give me sorrow, unless, if I were a pope,
Nat oonly thou, but every myghty man,	Not only thou, but every mighty man,
Though he were shorn ful hye upon his pan,	Though he had a tonsure very prominently upon his head,
Sholde have a wyf; for al the world is lorn!	Should have a wife; for all the world is lost!
Religioun hath take up al the corn	Religion has taken up all the best
Of tredyng, and we borel men been shrympes.	At copulating, and we laymen are shrimps.
Of fieble trees ther comen wrecched ympes.	Of feeble trees there come weak offshoots.
This maketh that oure heires been so sklendre	This makes our heirs to be so scrawny
And feble that they may nat wel engendre.	And feeble that they can not well beget children.
This maketh that oure wyves wole assaye	This makes it that our wives want to try out
Religious folk, for ye mowe bettre paye	Folk in holy orders, for you can better pay
Of Venus paiementz than mowe we;	Venus' payments than we can;
God woot, no lussheburghes payen ye!	God knows, you pay with no inferior coins!
But be nat wrooth, my lord, though that I pleye.	But be not angry, my lord, though I am joking.
Ful ofte in game a sooth I have herd seye!"	Very often I have heard a truth said in jest!"
This worthy Monk took al in pacience,	This worthy Monk took all in patience,
And seyde, "I wol doon al my diligence,	And said, "I will devote all my efforts,
As fer as sowneth into honestee,	So far as it is conducive to propriety,
To telle yow a tale, or two, or three.	To tell you a tale, or two, or three.
And if yow list to herkne hyderward,	And if you desire to listen to me,
I wol yow seyn the lyf of Seint Edward;	I will tell you the life of Saint Edward;
Or ellis, first, tragedies wol I telle,	Or else, first, I will tell tragedies,
Of whiche I have an hundred in my celle.	Of which I have a hundred in my cell.
Tragedie is to seyn a certeyn storie,	Tragedy means a true narrative,
As olde bookes maken us memorie,	As old books make us remember,
Of hym that stood in greet prosperitee,	Of one who stood in great prosperity,
And is yfallen out of heigh degree	And is fallen out of high degree
Into myserie, and endeth wrecchedly.	Into misery, and ends wretchedly.
And they ben versified communely	And ordinarily they are in verses
Of six feet, which men clepen exametron.	Of six feet, which men call hexameters.
In prose eek been endited many oon,	Many are also composed in prose,
And eek in meetre in many a sondry wyse.	And also in meters of many and various sorts.
Lo, this declaryng oghte ynogh suffise.	Lo, this explanation ought to suffice enough.
"Now herkneth, if yow liketh for to heere.	"Now hearken, if it pleases you to hear.
But first I yow biseeke in this mateere,	But first I beseech you in this matter,
Though I by ordre telle nat thise thynges,	Though I do not tell these things in chronological order,
Be it of popes, emperours, or kynges,	Be it of popes, emperors, or kings,
After hir ages, as men writen fynde,	According to their times, as men find written,
But tellen hem som bifore and som bihynde,	But tell some of them before and some behind,
As it now comth unto my remembraunce,	As it now comes unto my memory,
Have me excused of myn ignoraunce."	Hold me excused for my ignorance."
Heere bigynneth the Monkes Tale.	Here begins the Monk's Tale.
I wol biwaille in manere of tragedie	I will bewail in the manner of tragedy
The harm of hem that stoode in heigh degree,	The harm of those who stood in high degree,
And fillen so that ther nas no remedie	And fell so that there was no remedy
To brynge hem out of hir adversitee.	To bring them out of their adversity.
For certein, whan that Fortune list to flee,	For certainly, when Fortune desires to flee,
Ther may no man the cours of hire withholde.	No man can withstand her onward movement.
Lat no man truste on blynd prosperitee;	Let no man trust on blind prosperity;
Be war by thise ensamples trewe and olde.	Take warning from these examples true and old.
At Lucifer, though he an angel were	At Lucifer, though he was an angel
And nat a man, at hym wol I bigynne.	And not a man, at him will I begin.
For though Fortune may noon angel dere,	For though Fortune may harm no angel,
From heigh degree yet fel he for his synne	From high degree yet for his sin he fell
Doun into helle, where he yet is inne.	Down into hell, in which he is yet.
O Lucifer, brightest of angels alle,	O Lucifer, brightest of all angels,
Now artow Sathanas, that mayst nat twynne	Now art thou Sathanas, that mayst not depart
Out of miserie, in which that thou art falle.	Out of misery, in which thou art fallen.
Loo Adam, in the feeld of Damyssene	Lo Adam, in the field of Damascus
With Goddes owene fynger wroght was he,	With God's own finger was he wrought,
And nat bigeten of mannes sperme unclene,	And not begotten of man's unclean sperm,
And welte al paradys savynge o tree.	And ruled all paradise save for one tree.
Hadde nevere worldly man so heigh degree	Had never worldly man so high degree
As Adam, til he for mysgovernaunce	As Adam, until he for misconduct
Was dryven out of hys hye prosperitee	Was driven out of his high prosperity
To labour, and to helle, and to meschaunce.	To labor, and to hell, and to ruin.
Loo Sampsoun, which that was annunciat	Lo Sampson, whose birth was announced
By th'angel longe er his nativitee,	By the angel long before his nativity,
And was to God Almyghty consecrat,	And was to God Almighty consecrated,
And stood in noblesse whil he myghte see.	And stood in noble estate while he could see.
Was nevere swich another as was hee,	There was never such another as was he,
To speke of strengthe, and therwith hardynesse;	To speak of strength, and bravery as well;
But to his wyves toolde he his secree,	But to his wives he told his secret,
Thurgh which he slow hymself for wrecchednesse.	Through which he slew himself for wretchedness.
Sampsoun, this noble almyghty champioun,	Sampson, this noble almighty champion,
Withouten wepen save his handes tweye,	Without any weapon save his two hands,
He slow and al torente the leoun,	He slew and tore all to pieces the lion,
Toward his weddyng walkynge by the weye.	(While he was) walking toward his wedding by the way.
His false wyf koude hym so plese and preye	His false wife could him so please and earnestly plead
Til she his conseil knew; and she, untrewe,	Until she knew his secrets; and she, untrue,
Unto his foos his conseil gan biwreye,	Unto his foes his secrets did betray,
And hym forsook, and took another newe.	And abandoned him, and took another new lover.
Thre hundred foxes took Sampson for ire,	Three hundred foxes Sampson took for ire,
And alle hir tayles he togydre bond,	And all their tails he tied together,
And sette the foxes tayles alle on fire,	And set the foxes' tails all on fire,
For he on every tayl had knyt a brond;	For he on every tail had tied a torch;
And they brende alle the cornes in that lond,	And they burned all the grain crops in that land,
And alle hire olyveres, and vynes eke.	And all their olive trees, and vines also.
A thousand men he slow eek with his hond,	A thousand men he slew also with his hand,
And hadde no wepen but an asses cheke.	And had no weapon but an ass's jawbone.
Whan they were slayn, so thursted hym that he	When they were slain, he was so thirsty that he
Was wel ny lorn, for which he gan to preye	Was well nigh lost, for which he prayed
That God wolde on his peyne han some pitee	That God would on his pain have some pity
And sende hym drynke, or elles moste he deye;	And send him drink, or else he must die;
And of this asses cheke, that was dreye,	And of this ass's jawbone, that was dry,
Out of a wang-tooth sprang anon a welle,	Out of a molar sprang right away a well,
Of which he drank ynogh, shortly to seye;	Of which he drank enough, shortly to say;
Thus heelp hym God, as Judicum can telle.	Thus God helped him, as The Book of Judges can tell.
By verray force at Gazan on a nyght,	By sheer force at Gaza on one night,
Maugree Philistiens of that citee,	Despite the Philistines of that city,
The gates of the toun he hath up plyght,	The gates of the town he has plucked up,
And on his bak ycaryed hem hath hee	And on his back he has carried them
Hye on an hill whereas men myghte hem see.	High on a hill where men could see them.
O noble, almyghty Sampsoun, lief and deere,	O noble, almighty Sampson, beloved and dear,
Had thou nat toold to wommen thy secree,	Had thou not told to women thy secret,
In al this world ne hadde been thy peere!	In all this world there had not been thy peer!
This Sampson nevere ciser drank ne wyn,	This Sampson never drank alcoholic drinks nor wine,
Ne on his heed cam rasour noon ne sheere,	Nor on his head came any razor or scissors,
By precept of the messager divyn,	By command of the divine messenger,
For alle his strengthes in his heeres weere.	For all his powers were in his hair.
And fully twenty wynter, yeer by yeere,	And fully twenty winters, year by year,
He hadde of Israel the governaunce.	He had the governance of Israel.
But soone shal he wepe many a teere,	But soon shall he weep many a tear,
For wommen shal hym bryngen to meschaunce!	For women shall bring him to misfortune!
Unto his lemman Dalida he tolde	Unto his sweetheart Dalilah he told
That in his heeris al his strengthe lay,	That all his strength lay in his hair,
And falsly to his foomen she hym solde.	And falsely to his foemen she sold him.
And slepynge in hir barm upon a day,	And sleeping on her bosom upon one day,
She made to clippe or shere his heres away,	She contrived to clip or shear his hair away,
And made his foomen al his craft espyen;	And made his foemen know all his craft;
And whan that they hym foond in this array,	And when they found him in this condition,
They bounde hym faste and putten out his yen.	They bound him securely and put out his eyes.
But er his heer were clipped or yshave,	But before his hair was clipped or shaven,
Ther was no boond with which men myghte him bynde;	There was no bond with which men could bind him;
But now is he in prison in a cave,	But now is he in prison in a cave,
Where-as they made hym at the queerne grynde.	Where they made him grind at the mill.
O noble Sampsoun, strongest of mankynde,	O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind,
O whilom juge, in glorie and in richesse!	O formerly judge, in glory and in riches!
Now maystow wepen with thyne eyen blynde,	Now mayst thou weep with thy blind eyes,
Sith thou fro wele art falle in wrecchednesse.	Since thou from prosperity art fallen into wretchedness.
The ende of this caytyf was as I shal seye.	The end of this captive was as I shall say.
His foomen made a feeste upon a day,	His foemen made a feast upon one day,
And made hym as hire fool biforn hem pleye;	And made him as their fool play before them;
And this was in a temple of greet array.	And this was in a temple of great magnificence.
But atte laste he made a foul affray,	But at the last he made a terrifying assault,
For he two pilers shook and made hem falle,	For he shook two pillars and made them fall,
And doun fil temple and al, and ther it lay --	And down fell temple and all, and there it lay --
And slow hymself, and eek his foomen alle.	And slew himself, and also all his foemen.
This is to seyn, the prynces everichoon,	This is to say, every one of the princes,
And eek thre thousand bodyes, were ther slayn	And also three thousand bodies, were there slain
With fallynge of the grete temple of stoon.	By the falling of the great temple of stone.
Of Sampson now wol I namoore sayn.	Of Sampson now I will say no more.
Beth war by this ensample oold and playn	Beware by this example old and plain
That no men telle hir conseil til hir wyves	That no men tell their secrets to their wives
Of swich thyng as they wolde han secree fayn,	Of such things as they would earnestly keep secret,
If that it touche hir lymes or hir lyves.	If it concerns their limbs or their lives.
Hercules	Of Hercules, the sovereyn conquerour,
Of Hercules, the supreme conqueror,	Syngen his werkes laude and heigh renoun;
His works sing his praise and high renown;	For in his tyme of strengthe he was the flour.
For in his time he was the flower of strength.	He slow and rafte the skyn of the leoun;
He slew and tore off the skin of the lion;	He of Centauros leyde the boost adoun;
He laid down the boast of the Centaurs;	He Arpies slow, the crueel bryddes felle;
He slew the Harpies, the fierce cruel birds;	He golden apples rafte of the dragoun;
He seized the golden apples of the dragon;	He drow out Cerberus, the hound of helle;
He dragged Cerberus, the hound, out of Hell;	He slow the crueel tyrant Busirus
He slew the cruel tyrant Busirus	And made his hors to frete hym, flessh and boon;
And made his horses eat him, flesh and bone;	He slow the firy serpent venymus;
He slew the fiery venomous serpent;	Of Acheloys two hornes he brak oon;
He broke one of Achelous' two horns;	And he slow Cacus in a cave of stoon;
And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone;	He slow the geant Antheus the stronge;
He slew the giant Antheus the strong;	He slow the grisly boor, and that anon;
He slew the grisly boar, and that very quickly;	And bar the hevene on his nekke longe.
And long bore the heaven on his neck.	Was nevere wight, sith that this world bigan,
Was never a person, since this world began,	That slow so manye monstres as dide he.
That slew as many monsters as did he.	Thurghout this wyde world his name ran,
Throughout this wide world his name ran,	What for his strengthe and for his heigh bountee,
What for his strength and for his great goodness,	And every reawme wente he for to see.
And he went to see every realm.	He was so stroong that no man myghte hym lette.
He was so strong that no man could prevent him.	At bothe the worldes endes, seith Trophee,
At both ends of the world, says Trophee,	In stide of boundes he a pileer sette.
In stead of boundary markers he set a pillar.	A lemman hadde this noble champioun,
This noble champion had a sweetheart,	That highte Dianira, fressh as May;
Who was called Dianira, fresh as May;	And as thise clerkes maken mencioun,
And as these clerks make mention,	She hath hym sent a sherte, fressh and gay.
She has sent him a shirt, fresh and gay.	Allas, this sherte -- allas and weylaway! --
Alas, this shirt -- alas and woe oh woe! --	Envenymed was so subtilly withalle
Was so skillfully envenomed indeed	That er that he had wered it half a day
That before he had worn it half a day	It made his flessh al from his bones falle.
It made all his flesh fall from his bones.	But nathelees somme clerkes hire excusen
But nonetheless some clerks excuse her	By oon that highte Nessus, that it maked.
By one who was called Nessus, who made it.	Be as be may, I wol hire noght accusen;
However it may be, I will not accuse her;	But on his bak this sherte he wered al naked
But on his back all naked he wore this shirt	Til that his flessh was for the venym blaked.
Until his flesh was blackened because of the venom.	And whan he saugh noon oother remedye,
And when he saw no other remedy,	In hoote coles he hath hymselven raked,
He has himself covered over in hot coals,	For with no venym deigned hym to dye.
For with no venom did he deign to die.	Thus starf this worthy, myghty Hercules.
Thus died this worthy, mighty Hercules.	Lo, who may truste on Fortune any throwe?
Lo, who can trust on Fortune for any time?	For hym that folweth al this world of prees
For he who follows (the ways of) all this dangerous world	Er he be war is ofte yleyd ful lowe.
Before he is aware is often laid very low.	Ful wys is he that kan hymselven knowe!
Very wise is he who can know himself!	Beth war, for whan that Fortune list to glose,
Be wary, for when Fortune wants to deceive,	Thanne wayteth she her man to overthrowe
Then she waits to overthrow her man	By swich a wey as he wolde leest suppose.
By such a means as he would least suppose.	Nabugodonosor
Nebuchadnessar	The myghty trone, the precious tresor,
The mighty throne, the precious treasure,	The glorious ceptre, and roial magestee
The glorious scepter, and royal majesty	That hadde the kyng Nabugodonosor
That had the king Nebuchadnessar	With tonge unnethe may discryved bee.
With tongue can hardly be described.	He twyes wan Jerusalem the citee;
He twice won the city of Jerusalem;	The vessel of the temple he with hym ladde.
The vessels of the temple he took with him.	At Babiloigne was his sovereyn see,
At Babylon was his sovereign throne,	In which his glorie and his delit he hadde.
In which he had his glory and his delight.	The faireste children of the blood roial
The fairest children of the blood royal	Of Israel he leet do gelde anoon,
Of Israel he had gelded indeed,	And maked ech of hem to been his thral.
And made each of them to be his slave.	Amonges othere Daniel was oon,
Among others Daniel was one,	That was the wiseste child of everychon,
Who was the wisest child of them all,	For he the dremes of the kyng expowned,
For he expounded the dreams of the king,	Whereas in Chaldeye clerk ne was ther noon
Whereas in Chaldea there was no clerk	That wiste to what fyn his dremes sowned.
Who knew what his dreams meant.	This proude kyng leet maken a statue of gold,
This proud king had made a statue of gold,	Sixty cubites long and sevene in brede,
Sixty cubits long and seven in breadth,	To which ymage bothe yong and oold
To which image both young and old	Comanded he to loute, and have in drede,
Commanded he to bow down, and hold in veneration,	Or in a fourneys, ful of flambes rede,
Or in a furnace, full of red flames,	He shal be brent that wolde noght obeye.
He who would not obey shall be burned.	But nevere wolde assente to that dede
But never would assent to (do) that deed	Daniel ne his yonge felawes tweye.
Daniel nor his two young fellows.	This kyng of kynges proud was and elaat;
This king of kings was proud and arrogant;	He wende that God, that sit in magestee,
He supposed that God, who sits in majesty,	Ne myghte hym nat bireve of his estaat.
Could not deprive him of his estate.	But sodeynly he loste his dignytee,
But suddenly he lost his high office,	And lyk a beest hym semed for to bee,
And like a beast he seemed to be,	And eet hey as an oxe, and lay theroute
And ate hay like an ox, and lay outside	In reyn; with wilde beestes walked hee
In rain; with wild beasts walked he	Til certein tyme was ycome aboute.
Until a certain number of years had passed.	And lik an egles fetheres wax his heres;
And his hair grew to be like an eagle's feathers;	His nayles lyk a briddes clawes weere;
His nails were like a bird's claws;	Til God relessed hym a certeyn yeres,
Until God released him (after) a certain (number of) years,	And yaf hym wit, and thanne with many a teere
And gave him back his wits, and then with many a tear	He thanked God, and evere his lyf in feere
He thanked God, and always in his life in fear	Was he to doon amys or moore trespace;
Was he to do amiss or again trespass;	And til that tyme he leyd was on his beere
And until that time he was laid on his bier	He knew that God was ful of myght and grace.
He knew that God was full of might and grace.	Balthasar
Belshazzar	His sone, which that highte Balthasar,
His son, who was called Belshazzar,	That heeld the regne after his fader day,
Who held the reign after his father's day,	He by his fader koude noght be war,
He by (the example of) his father could not be warned,	For proud he was of herte and of array,
For he was proud of heart and of behavior,	And eek an ydolastre was he ay.
And also he was always an idolater.	His hye estaat assured hym in pryde;
His high estate made him confident in pride;	But Fortune caste hym doun, and ther he lay,
But Fortune cast him down, and there he lay,	And sodeynly his regne gan divide.
And suddenly his reign began to break apart.	A feeste he made unto his lordes alle
A feast he made for all his lords	Upon a tyme and bad hem blithe bee;
Upon a time and bade them be happy;	And thanne his officeres gan he calle:
And then his officers he did call:	"Gooth, bryngeth forth the vesseles," quod he,
"Go, bring forth the vessels," said he,	"Whiche that my fader in his prosperitee
"Which my father in his flourishing time	Out of the temple of Jerusalem birafte;
Robbed out of the temple of Jerusalem;	And to oure hye goddes thanke we
And to our high gods we give thanks	Of honour that oure eldres with us lafte."
For the honor that our elders left with us."	Hys wyf, his lordes, and his concubynes
His wife, his lords, and his concubines	Ay dronken, whil hire appetites laste,
Always drank, while their appetites lasted	Out of thise noble vessels sondry wynes.
Various wines out of these noble vessels.	And on a wal this kyng his eyen caste
And on a wall this king cast his eyes	And saugh an hand, armlees, that wroot ful faste,
And saw a hand, armless, that wrote very fast,	For feere of which he quook and siked soore.
For fear of which he quaked and sighed deeply.	This hand that Balthasar so soore agaste
This hand that so deeply terrified Belshazzar	Wroot Mane, techel, phares, and namoore.
Wrote Mane, techel, phares, and no more.	In all that land magicien was noon
In all that land was no magician	That koude expoune what this lettre mente;
Who could explain what this text meant;	But Daniel expowned it anoon,
But Daniel explained it right away,	And seyde, "Kyng, God to thy fader lente
And said, "King, God to thy father lent	Glorie and honour, regne, tresour, rente;
Glory and honor, reign, treasure, income;	And he was proud and nothyng God ne dradde,
And he was proud and not at all dreaded God,	And therfore God greet wreche upon hym sente,
And therefore God sent great vengeance upon him,	And hym birafte the regne that he hadde.
And took away from him the reign that he had.	"He was out cast of mannes compaignye;
"He was cast out of man's company;	With asses was his habitacioun,
With asses was his habitation,	And eet hey as a beest in weet and drye
And ate hay as a beast in wet (weather) and dry	Til that he knew, by grace and by resoun,
Until he knew, by grace and by reason,	That God of hevene hath domynacioun
That God of heaven has domination	Over every regne and every creature;
Over every reign and every creature;	And thanne hadde God of hym compassioun,
And then had God on him compassion,	And hym restored his regne and his figure.
And to him restored his reign and his bodily form.	"Eek thou, that art his sone, art proud also,
"Also thou, who art his son, art proud also,	And knowest alle thise thynges verraily,
And knowest all these things truly,	And art rebel to God, and art his foo.
And art rebel to God, and art his foe.	Thou drank eek of his vessels boldely;
Thou drank also of his vessels boldly;	Thy wyf eek, and thy wenches, synfully
Thy wife also, and thy wenches, sinfully	Dronke of the same vessels sondry wynys;
Drank of the same vessels various wines;	And heryest false goddes cursedly;
And worship false gods cursedly;	Therefore to thee yshapen ful greet pyne ys.
Therefore to thee is ordained very great pain.	"This hand was sent from God that on the wal
"This hand was sent from God that on the wall	Wroot Mane, techel, phares, truste me;
Wrote Mane, techel, pares, trust me;	Thy regne is doon; thou weyest noght at al.
Thy reign is done; thou art of no account at all.	Dyvyded is thy regne, and it shal be
Broken up is thy kingdom, and it shall be	To Medes and to Perses yeven," quod he.
Given to Medes and to Persians," said he.	And thilke same nyght this kyng was slawe,
And that same night this king was slain,	And Darius occupieth his degree,
And Darius occupies his throne,	Thogh he therto hadde neither right ne lawe.
Though for this he had neither right nor law.	Lordynges, ensample heerby may ye take
Gentlemen, example may you take from this	How that in lordshipe is no sikernesse,
How in lordship is no security,	For whan Fortune wole a man forsake,
For when Fortune will forsake a man,	She bereth awey his regne and his richesse,
She bears away his reign and his riches,	And eek his freendes, bothe moore and lesse.
And also his friends, both high ranking and low.	For what man that hath freendes thurgh Fortune,
For whatever man who has friends because of Fortune,	Mishap wol maken hem enemys, I gesse;
Misfortune will make them enemies, I believe;	This proverbe is ful sooth and ful commune.
This proverb is very true and very common.	Cenobia
Zenobia	Cenobia, of Palymerie queene,
Zenobia, of Palmyra queen,	As writen Persiens of hir noblesse,
As Persians write of her nobility,	So worthy was in armes and so keene
So worthy was in arms and so fierce	That no wight passed hire in hardynesse,
That no person passed her in boldness,	Ne in lynage, ne in oother gentillesse.
Nor in lineage, nor in other noble traits.	Of kynges blood of Perce is she descended.
Of the blood of kings of Persia is she descended.	I seye nat that she hadde moost fairnesse,
I say not that she had most beauty,	But of hir shap she myghte nat been amended.
But of her shape she could not be improved.	From hire childhede I fynde that she fledde
From her childhood I find that she fled	Office of wommen, and to wode she wente,
Duties of women, and to the woods she went,	And many a wilde hertes blood she shedde
And many a wild hart's blood she shed	With arwes brode that she to hem sente.
With broad-headed arrows that she to them sent.	She was so swift that she anon hem hente;
She was so swift that she quickly seized them;	And whan that she was elder, she wolde kille
And when she was older, she would kill	Leouns, leopardes, and beres al torente,
Lions, leopards, and bears all torn to pieces,	And in hir armes weelde hem at hir wille.
And in her arms handled them at her will.	She dorste wilde beestes dennes seke,
She dared to seek wild beasts' dens,	And rennen in the montaignes al the nyght,
And to run in the mountains all the night,	And slepen under a bussh, and she koude eke
And to sleep under a bush, and she could also	Wrastlen, by verray force and verray myght,
Wrestle, by sheer force and sheer strength,	With any yong man, were he never so wight.
With any young man, were he never so strong.	Ther myghte no thyng in hir armes stonde.
There might no thing withstand her arms.	She kepte hir maydenhod from every wight;
She kept her maidenhead from every person;	To no man deigned hire for to be bonde.
She disdained to be bound to no man.	But atte laste hir freendes han hire maried
But at the last her friends have married her	To Odenake, a prynce of that contree,
To Odenake, a prince of that country,	Al were it so that she hem longe taried.
Although it was so that she long delayed them.	And ye shul understonde how that he
And you must understand that he	Hadde swiche fantasies as hadde she.
Had such fantasies as had she.	But natheless, whan they were knyt in-feere,
But nonetheless, when they were knit together,	They lyved in joye and in felicitee,
They lived in joy and in felicity,	For ech of hem hadde oother lief and deere,
For each of them held the other beloved and dear,	Save o thyng: that she wolde nevere assente,
Save one thing: that she would never assent,	By no wey, that he sholde by hire lye
In any way, that he should by her lie	But ones, for it was hir pleyn entente
But once, for it was her full intention	To have a child, the world to multiplye;
To have a child, the world to multiply;	And also soone as that she myghte espye
And as soon as she could see	That she was nat with childe with that dede,
That she was not with child by means of that deed,	Thanne wolde she suffre hym doon his fantasye
Then would she allow him to do his desires	Eft-soone, and nat but oones, out of drede.
Again, and only but once, no doubt.	And if she were with childe at thilke cast,
And if she were with childe at that time,	Namoore sholde he pleyen thilke game
No more should he play that same game	Til fully fourty wikes weren past;
Until fully forty weeks were past;	Thanne wolde she ones suffre hym do the same.
Then would she once allow him to do the same.	Al were this Odenake wilde or tame,
Even if this Odenake were wild or tame,	He gat namoore of hire, for thus she seyde:
He got no more of her, for thus she said:	It was to wyves lecherie and shame,
It was to wives lechery and shame,	In oother caas, if that men with hem pleyde.
In any other case, if men had sexual relations with them.	Two sones by this Odenake hadde she,
Two sons by this Odenake had she,	The whiche she kepte in vertu and lettrure.
Whom she kept in virtue and learning.	But now unto oure tale turne we.
But now unto our tale we turn.	I seye, so worshipful a creature,
I say, so worshipful a creature,	And wys therwith, and large with mesure,
And wise also, and generous in moderation,	So penyble in the werre, and curteis eke,
So assiduous in the war, and courtly also,	Ne moore labour myghte in werre endure,
Nor more labor could in war endure,	Was noon, though al this world men sholde seke.
Was none, though through all this world men should seek.	Hir riche array ne myghte nat be told,
Her rich furnishings could not be told,	As wel in vessel as in hire clothyng.
As well in utensils as in her clothing.	She was al clad in perree and in gold,
She was all clad in precious stones and in gold,	And eek she lafte noght, for noon huntyng,
And also she did not neglect, for any hunting,	To have of sondry tonges ful knowyng,
To have of various tongues full knowing,	Whan that she leyser hadde; and for to entende
When she had leisure; and to endeavor	To lerne bookes was al hire likyng,
To learn books was all her desire,	How she in vertu myghte hir lyf dispende.
How she in virtue might spend her life.	And shortly of this storie for to trete,
And shortly of this history to treat,	So doghty was hir housbonde and eek she,
So doughty was her husband and also she,	That they conquered manye regnes grete
That they conquered many great realms	In the orient, with many a fair citee
In the orient, with many a fair city	Apertenaunt unto the magestee
Belonging unto the majesty	Of Rome, and with strong hond held hem ful faste,
Of Rome, and with strong hand held them very tightly,	Ne nevere myghte hir foomen doon hem flee,
Nor never could their foemen make them flee,	Ay whil that Odenakes dayes laste.
Always while Odenake's days lasted.	Hir batailles, whoso list hem for to rede,
Their battles, whoever may wish to read them,	Agayn Sapor the kyng and othere mo,
Against Shapur the king and many others,	And how that al this proces fil in dede,
And how all this business happened in actuality,	Why she conquered and what title had therto,
Why she conquered and what legal claim she had to it,	And after, of hir meschief and hire wo,
And after, of her troubles and her woe,	How that she was biseged and ytake --
How she was besieged and taken --	Lat hym unto my maister Petrak go,
Let him unto my master Petrarch go,	That writ ynough of this, I undertake.
Who wrote at length about this, I guarantee.	Whan Odenake was deed, she myghtily
When Odenake was dead, she mightily	The regnes heeld, and with hire propre hond
Defended the country, and with her own hand	Agayn hir foos she faught so cruelly
Against her foes she fought so cruelly	That ther nas kyng ne prynce in al that lond
That there was no king nor prince in all that land	That he nas glad, if he that grace fond,
That he was not glad, if he found such grace,	That she ne wolde upon his lond werreye.
That she would not make war upon his land.	With hire they maden alliance by bond
With her they made alliance by covenant	To been in pees, and lete hire ride and pleye.
To be in peace, and let her ride about and enjoy herself.	The Emperour of Rome, Claudius
The Emperor of Rome, Claudius	Ne hym bifore, the Romayn Galien,
Nor, before him, the Roman Galien,	Ne dorste nevere been so corageus,
Dared never be so courageous	Ne noon Ermyn, ne noon Egipcien,
Nor any Armenian, nor any Egyptian,	Ne Surrien, ne noon Arabyen,
Nor Syrian, nor any Arabian,	Withinne the feeld that dorste with hire fighte,
Within the field that dared fight with her,	Lest that she wolde hem with hir handes slen,
Lest she would slay them with her hands,	Or with hir meignee putten hem to flighte.
Or with her troop put them to flight.	In kynges habit wente hir sones two,
In kings' clothing went her two sons,	As heires of hir fadres regnes alle,
As heirs of all their father's reigns,	And Hermanno and Thymalao
And Hermanno and Thymalao	Hir names were, as Persiens hem calle.
Their names were, as Persians call them.	But ay Fortune hath in hire hony galle;
But always Fortune has bitterness in her honey;	This myghty queene may no while endure.
This mighty queen can no longer endure.	Fortune out of hir regne made hire falle
Fortune out of her reign made her fall	To wrecchednesse and to mysaventure.
To wretchedness and to misfortune.	Aurelian, whan that the governaunce
Aurelian, when the governance	Of Rome cam into his handes tweye,
Of Rome came into his two hands,	He shoop upon this queene to doon vengeaunce.
He prepared to do vengeance upon this queen.	And with his legions he took his weye
And with his legions he took his way	Toward Cenobie, and shortly for to seye,
Toward Zenobia, and shortly to say,	He made hire flee, and atte laste hire hente,
He made her flee, and at the last seized her,	And fettred hire, and eek hire children tweye,
And put her in fetters, and also her two children,	And wan the land, and hoom to Rome he wente.
And won the land, and home to Rome he went.	Amonges othere thynges that he wan,
Amongst other things that he won,	Hir chaar, that was with gold wroght and perree,
Her chariot, that was wrought with gold and precious stones,	This grete Romayn, this Aurelian,
This great Roman, this Aurelian,	Hath with hym lad, for that men sholde it see.
Has with him led, so that men should see it.	Biforen his triumphe walketh shee,
Before his triumphal procession she walks,	With gilte cheynes on hire nekke hangynge.
With gilded chains hanging on her neck.	Coroned was she, as after hir degree,
Crowned was she, in accord with her rank,	And ful of perree charged hire clothynge.
And her clothing loaded full of precious stones.	Allas, Fortune! She that whilom was
Alas, Fortune! She that formerly was	Dredeful to kynges and to emperoures,
Fearsome to kings and to emperors,	Now gaureth al the peple on hire, allas!
Now all the people stare on her, alas!	And she that helmed was in starke stoures
And she who wore helmets in violent battles	And wan by force townes stronge and toures,
And won by force strong towns and towers,	Shal on hir heed now were a vitremyte;
Shall on her head now wear a woman's headdress;	And she that bar the ceptre ful of floures
And she that bore the scepter full of flowers	Shal bere a distaf, hire cost for to quyte.
Shall bear a spinning staff, to pay for her living costs.	De Petro Rege Ispannie
Concerning Pedro King of Castille	O noble, O worthy Petro, glorie of Spayne,
O noble, O worthy Pedro, glory of Spain,	Whom Fortune heeld so hye in magestee,
Whom Fortune held so high in majesty,	Wel oghten men thy pitous deeth complayne!
Well ought men complain of thy piteous death!	Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,	And after, at a seege, by subtiltee,
And after, at a siege, by trickery,	Thou were bitraysed and lad unto his tente,
Thou were betrayed and led unto his tent,	Where as he with his owene hand slow thee,
Where he with his own hand slew thee,	Succedynge in thy regne and in thy rente.
Succeeding to thy reign and to thy income.	The feeld of snow, with th' egle of blak therinne,
The field of snow, with the eagle of black therein,	Caught with the lymrod coloured as the gleede,
Caught by the bird-lime on a rod colored like the burning coal,	He brew this cursednesse and al this synne.
He brewed this cursedness and all this sin.	The wikked nest was werker of this nede.
The wicked nest was worker of this violent act.	Noght Charles Olyver, that took ay heede
Not Charlemagne's Oliver, who always took heed	Of trouthe and honour, but of Armorike
Of truth and honor, but of Armorica	Genylon-Olyver, corrupt for meede,
Ganelon-Oliver, corrupt for a bribe,	Broghte this worthy kyng in swich a brike.
Brought this worthy king into such a plight.	De Petro Rege de Cipro
Concerning Pierre de Lusignan, King of Cyprus	O worthy Petro, kyng of Cipre, also,
O worthy Pierre, king of Cyprus, also,	That Alisandre wan by heigh maistrie,
Who won Alexandria by great strength,	Ful many an hethen wroghtestow ful wo,
To very many a heathen thou wroughtest great woe,	Of which thyne owene liges hadde envie,
Of which thine own lieges had envy,	And for no thyng but for thy chivalrie
And for no thing but for thy chivalry	They in thy bed han slayn thee by the morwe.
They in thy bed have slain thee in the morning.	Thus kan Fortune hir wheel governe and gye,
Thus can Fortune govern and guide her wheel,	And out of joye brynge men to sorwe.
And out of joy bring men to sorrow.	De Barnabo de Lumbardia
Concerning Bernabo Visconti of Lombardy	Off Melan grete Barnabo Viscounte,
Great Bernabo Viscounti of Milan,	God of delit and scourge of Lumbardye,
God of delight and scourge of Lombardy,	Why sholde I nat thyn infortune acounte,
Why should I not thy misfortune recount,	Sith in estaat thow cloumbe were so hye?
Since in rank thou had climbed so high?	Thy brother sone, that was thy double allye,
Thy brother's son, who was thy double kinsman,	For he thy nevew was and sone-in-lawe,
For he was thy nephew and son-in-law,	Withinne his prisoun made thee to dye --
Within his prison made thee to die --	But why ne how noot I that thou were slawe.
But why nor how thou were slain I know not.	De Hugelino Comite de Pize
[Concerning Ugolino, Earl of Pisa]	Off the Erl Hugelyn of Pyze the langour
Of the anguish of Earl Ugolino of Pisa	Ther may no tonge telle for pitee.
There can no tongue tell for pity.	But litel out of Pize stant a tour,
But a little way out of Pisa stands a tower,	In which tour in prisoun put was he,
In which tower in prison he was put,	And with hym been his litel children thre;
And with him are his three little children;	The eldest scarsly fyf yeer was of age.
The eldest was scarcely five years of age.	Allas, Fortune, it was greet crueltee
Alas, Fortune, it was great cruelty	Swiche briddes for to putte in swich a cage!
To put such birds in such a cage!	Dampned was he to dyen in that prisoun,
He was damned to die in that prison,	For Roger, which that bisshop was of Pize,
For Roger, who was bishop of Pisa,	Hadde on hym maad a fals suggestioun,
Had on him made a false accusation,	Thurgh which the peple gan upon hym rise
Through which the people did rise against him	And putten hym to prisoun in swich wise
And put him into prison in such manner	As ye han herd, and mete and drynke he hadde
As you have heard, and meat and drink he had	So smal that wel unnethe it may suffise,
So small that it just barely can suffice,	And therwithal it was ful povre and badde.
And in addition it was very poor and bad.	And on a day bifil that in that hour
And on a day befell that in that hour	Whan that his mete wont was to be broght,
When his meal was accustomed to be brought,	The gayler shette the dores of the tour.
The jailer shut the doors of the tower.	He herde it wel, but he spak right noght,
He heard it well, but he spoke absolutely nothing,	And in his herte anon ther fil a thoght
And in his heart straightway there fell a thought	That they for hunger wolde doon hym dyen.
That they for hunger would make him die.	"Allas!" quod he, "Allas, that I was wroght!"
"Alas!" said he, "Alas, that I was wrought!"	Therwith the teeris fillen from his yen.
Therewith the tears fell from his eyes.	His yonge sone, that thre yeer was of age,
His young son, who was three years of age,	Unto hym seyde, "Fader, why do ye wepe?
Unto him said, "Father, why do you weep?	Whanne wol the gayler bryngen oure potage?
When will the jailer bring our soup?	Is ther no morsel breed that ye do kepe?
Is there no morsel of bread that you do keep?	I am so hungry that I may nat slepe.
I am so hungry that I can not sleep.	Now wolde God that I myghte slepen evere!
Now would God that I might sleep forever!	Thanne sholde nat hunger in my wombe crepe;
Then hunger should not creep in my belly;	Ther is no thyng, but breed, that me were levere."
There is nothing, but food, that I would rather have."	Thus day by day this child bigan to crye,
Thus day by day this child began to cry,	Til in his fadres barm adoun it lay,
Until in his father's bosom down it lay,	And seyde, "Farewel, fader, I moot dye!"
And said, "Farewell, father, I must die!"	And kiste his fader, and dyde the same day.
And kissed his father, and died the same day.	And whan the woful fader deed it say,
And when the woeful father saw him dead,	For wo his armes two he gan to byte,
For woe his two arms he began to bite,	And seyde, "Allas, Fortune, and weylaway!
And said, "Alas, Fortune, and woe oh woe!	Thy false wheel my wo al may I wyte."
I can blame thy false wheel for all my woe."	His children wende that it for hunger was
His children supposed that it was for hunger	That he his armes gnow, and nat for wo,
That he gnawed on his arms, and not for woe,	And seyde, "Fader, do nat so, allas!
And said, "Father, do not so, alas!	But rather ete the flessh upon us two.
But rather eat the flesh upon us two.	Oure flessh thou yaf us, take oure flessh us fro,
Our flesh thou gave us, take our flesh from us,	And ete ynogh" -- right thus they to hym seyde,
And eat enough" -- right thus they to him said,	And after that, withinne a day or two,
And after that, within a day or two,	They leyde hem in his lappe adoun and deyde.
They laid themselves down in his lap and died.	Hymself, despeired, eek for hunger starf;
Himself, despaired, also for hunger died;	Thus ended is this myghty Erl of Pize.
Thus ended is this mighty Earl of Pisa.	From heigh estaat Fortune awey hym carf.
From high estate Fortune cut him away.	Of this tragedie it oghte ynough suffise;
Of this tragedy it ought enough suffice;	Whoso wol here it in a lenger wise,
Whoever wants to hear it in a longer version,	Redeth the grete poete of Ytaille
Read the great poet of Italy	That highte Dant, for he kan al devyse
Who is called Dante, for he can all narrate	Fro point to point; nat o word wol he faille.
In great detail; not one word will he lack.	Nero
Although that Nero were as vicius	Although Nero was as vicious
As any feend that lith ful lowe adoun,	As any fiend that lies very low down (in Hell),
Yet he, as telleth us Swetonius,	Yet he, as Suetonius tells us,
This wyde world hadde in subjeccioun,	Had this wide world in subjection,
Bothe est and west, [south], and septemtrioun.	Both east and west, [south], and north.
Of rubies, saphires, and of peerles white	Of rubies, sapphires, and of white pearls
Were alle his clothes brouded up and doun,	Were all his clothes embroidered from head to toe,
For he in gemmes greetly gan delite.	For he in gems greatly did delight.
Moore delicaat, moore pompous of array,	More fond of luxury, more pompous in behavior,
Moore proud was nevere emperour than he;	More proud than he was never emperor;
That ilke clooth that he hadde wered o day,	That same clothing that he had worn one day,
After that tyme he nolde it nevere see.	After that time he wanted never to see it.
Nettes of gold threed hadde he greet plentee	Nets of gold thread had he in great plenty
To fisshe in Tybre, whan hym liste pleye.	To fish in Tiber, when he wished to amuse himself.
His lustes were al lawe in his decree,	His desires were all lawful in his legal code,
For Fortune as his freend hym wolde obeye.	For Fortune as his friend would obey him.
He Rome brende for his delicasie;	He burned Rome for his pleasure;
The senatours he slow upon a day	The senators he slew upon one day
To heere how that men wolde wepe and crie;	To hear how men would weep and cry;
And slow his brother, and by his suster lay.	And slew his brother, and by his sister lay.
His mooder made he in pitous array,	His mother he put in piteous situation,
For he hire wombe slitte to biholde	For he slit her womb to behold
Where he conceyved was -- so weilaway	Where he was conceived -- so woe oh woe
That he so litel of his mooder tolde!	That he reckoned so little of his mother!
No teere out of his eyen for that sighte	No tear out of his eyes for that sight
Ne cam, but seyde, "A fair womman was she!"	Came, but he said, "A fair woman was she!"
Greet wonder is how that he koude or myghte	Great wonder is how that he could or might
Be domesman of hire dede beautee.	Be judge of her dead beauty.
The wyn to bryngen hym comanded he,	He commanded that the wine be brought to him ,
And drank anon -- noon oother wo he made.	And drank straightway -- no other mourning he made.
Whan myght is joyned unto crueltee,	When might is joined unto cruelty,
Allas, to depe wol the venym wade!	Alas, too deep will the venom go!
In yowthe a maister hadde this emperour	In youth this emperor had a master
To teche hym letterure and curteisye,	To teach him literature and courtesy,
For of moralitee he was the flour,	For of morality he was the flower,
As in his tyme, but if bookes lye;	In his time, unless books lie;
And whil this maister hadde of hym maistrye,	And while this master had of him mastery,
He maked hym so konnyng and so sowple	He made him so cunning and so humble
That longe tyme it was er tirannye	That long time it was before tyranny
Or any vice dorste on hym uncowple.	Or any vice dared unloose itself upon him.
This Seneca, of which that I devyse,	This Seneca, of whom I tell,
By cause Nero hadde of hym swich drede,	Because Nero had of him such dread,
For he fro vices wolde hym ay chastise	For he would always chastise him from vices
Discreetly, as by word and nat by dede --	Discreetly, as by word and not by deed --
"Sire," wolde he seyn, "an emperour moot nede	"Sire," would he say, "an emperor must of necessity
Be vertuous and hate tirannye --"	Be virtuous and hate tyranny --"
For which he in a bath made hym to blede	For which he in a bath made him to bleed
On bothe his armes, til he moste dye.	On both his arms, until he had to die.
This Nero hadde eek of acustumaunce	This Nero had also the custom
In youthe agayns his maister for to ryse,	In youth to rise in the presence of his master ,
Which afterward hym thoughte a greet grevaunce;	Which afterward seemed to him a greet grievance;
Therefore he made hym dyen in this wise.	Therefore he made him die in this manner.
But natheless this Seneca the wise	But nonetheless this Seneca the wise
Chees in a bath to dye in this manere	Chose in a bath to die in this manner
Rather than han another tormentise;	Rather than have another form of torment;
And thus hath Nero slayn his maister deere.	And thus has Nero slain his dear master.
Now fil it so that Fortune liste no lenger	Now it happened that Fortune no longer desired
The hye pryde of Nero to cherice,	The high pride of Nero to cherish,
For though that he were strong, yet was she strenger.	For though he may be strong, yet was she stronger.
She thoughte thus: "By God! I am to nyce	She thought thus: "By God! I am too foolish
To sette a man that is fulfild of vice	To set a man that is filled full of vice
In heigh degree, and emperour hym calle.	In high degree, and call him emperor.
By God, out of his sete I wol hym trice;	By God, out of his throne I will snatch him;
Whan he leest weneth, sonnest shal he falle."	When he least expects it, the most quickly shall he fall."
The peple roos upon hym on a nyght	The people rose upon him on one night
For his defaute, and whan he it espied,	For his wickedness, and when he espied it,
Out of his dores anon he hath hym dight	Out of his doors right away he has hastened himself
Allone, and ther he wende han been allied	Alone, and where he supposed to have been allied
He knokked faste, and ay the moore he cried	He knocked fast, and always the more he cried
The fastere shette they the dores alle.	The tighter they shut all the doors.
Tho wiste he wel, he hadde himself mysgyed,	Then he knew well, he had himself deluded,
And wente his wey; no lenger dorste he calle.	And went his way; no longer dared he call.
The peple cried and rombled up and doun,	The people cried and made a tumult up and down,
That with his erys herde he how they seyde,	That with his ears he heard how they said,
"Where is this false tiraunt, this Neroun?"	"Where is this false tyrant, this Nero?"
For fere almoost out of his wit he breyde,	For fear almost out of his wit he went,
And to his goddes pitously he preyde	And to his gods pitiably he prayed
For socour, but it myghte nat bityde.	For help, but it could not happen.
For drede of this hym thoughte that he deyde,	For dread of this it seemed to him that he died,
And ran into a gardyn hym to hyde.	And he ran into a garden to hide himself.
And in this gardyn foond he cherles tweye	And in this garden found he two churls
That seten by a fyr, greet and reed.	That sat by a fire, great and red.
And to thise cherles two he gan to preye	And to these two churls he did pray
To sleen hym and to girden of his heed,	To slay him and to strike off his head,
That to his body, whan that he were deed,	So that to his body, when he was deed,
Were no despit ydoon for his defame.	No insult was done for his ill fame.
Hymself he slow, he koude no bettre reed,	Himself he slew, he knew no better course of action,
Of which Fortune lough, and hadde a game.	About which Fortune laughed, and amused herself.
De Oloferno	Concerning Holofernes
Was nevere capitayn under a kyng	Was never captain under a king
That regnes mo putte in subjeccioun,	That put more reigns in subjection,
Ne strenger was in feeld of alle thyng,	Nor was stronger in all things concerning the field of battle,
As in his tyme, ne gretter of renoun,	In his time, nor greater of renown,
Ne moore pompous in heigh presumpcioun	Nor more arrogant in high presumption
Than Oloferne, which Fortune ay kiste	Than Holofernes, whom Fortune always kissed
So likerously, and ladde hym up and doun	So wantonly, and led him up and down
Til that his heed was of, er that he wiste.	Until his head was off, before he knew it.
Nat oonly that this world hadde hym in awe	Not only that this world had him in awe
For lesynge of richesse or libertee,	For (fear of) loss of riches or liberty,
But he made every man reneyen his lawe.	But he made every man renounce his religion.
"Nabugodonosor was god," seyde hee;	"Nebuchadnezzar was god," said he;
"Noon oother god sholde adoured bee."	"No other god should be adored."
Agayns his heeste no wight dorst trespace,	Against his command no person dared trespass,
Save in Bethulia, a strong citee,	Save in Bethulia, a strong city,
Where Eliachim a preest was of that place.	Where Eliachim (Joachim) was a priest of that place.
But taak kep of the deth of Oloferne:	But take heed of the death of Holofernes:
Amydde his hoost he dronke lay a-nyght,	Amid his host he lay drunk at night,
Withinne his tente, large as is a berne,	Within his tent, large as is a barn,
And yet, for al his pompe and al his myght,	And yet, for all his pomp and all his might,
Judith, a womman, as he lay upright	Judith, a woman, as he lay on his back
Slepynge, his heed of smoot, and from his tente	Sleeping, smote off his head, and from his tent
Ful pryvely she stal from every wight,	Very secretly she stole (away) from every person,
And with his heed unto hir toun she wente.	And with his head unto her town she went.
De Rege Antiocho illustri	[Concerning the Famous King Antiochus]
What nedeth it of kyng Anthiochus	What needs it of king Antiochus
To telle his hye roial magestee,	To tell his high royal majesty,
His hye pride, his werkes venymus?	His high pride, his venomous deeds?
For swich another was ther noon as he.	For such another was there no one like him.
Rede which that he was in Machabee,	Read who he was in Maccabees,
And rede the proude wordes that he seyde,	And read the proud words that he said,
And why he fil fro heigh prosperitee,	And why he fell from high prosperity,
And in an hill how wrecchedly he deyde.	And on a hill how wretchedly he died.
Fortune hym hadde enhaunced so in pride	Fortune had elevated him so in pride
That verraily he wende he myghte attayne	That truly he supposed he might attain
Unto the sterres upon every syde,	Unto the stars upon every side,
And in balance weyen ech montayne,	And in a scales weigh each mountain,
And alle the floodes of the see restrayne.	And all the floods of the sea restrain.
And Goddes peple hadde he moost in hate;	And God's people had he most in hate;
Hem wolde he sleen in torment and in payne,	Them he would slay in torment and in pain,
Wenynge that God ne myghte his pride abate.	Supposing that God could not reduce his pride.
And for that Nichanore and Thymothee	And because Nicanor and Timotheus
Of Jewes weren venquysshed myghtily,	By Jews were vanquished completely,
Unto the Jewes swich an hate hadde he	Unto the Jews such a hate had he
That he bad greithen his chaar ful hastily,	That he ordered his chariot prepared very hastily,
And swoor, and seyde ful despitously	And swore, and said very angrily
Unto Jerusalem he wolde eftsoone	Unto Jerusalem he would (go) immediately
To wreken his ire on it ful cruelly;	To wreak his ire on it very cruelly;
But of his purpos he was let ful soone.	But of his purpose he was prevented very soon.
God for his manace hym so soore smoot	God because of his threatening so sorely smote him
With invisible wounde, ay incurable,	With invisible wound, ever incurable,
That in his guttes carf it so and boot	That in his guts it carved so and bit
That his peynes weren importable.	That his pains were intolerable.
And certeinly the wreche was resonable,	And certainly the punishment was reasonable,
For many a mannes guttes dide he peyne.	For many a man's gut did he pain.
But from his purpos cursed and dampnable,	But from his cursed and damnable purpose,
For al his smert, he wolde hym nat restreyne,	For all his pain, he would not restrain himself,
But bad anon apparaillen his hoost;	But commanded straightway to prepare his host;
And sodeynly, er he was of it war,	And suddenly, before he was aware of it,
God daunted al his pride and al his boost.	God laid low all his pride and all his boast.
For he so soore fil out of his char	For he so sorely fell out of his throne
That it his limes and his skyn totar,	That it tore to pieces his limbs and his skin,
So that he neyther myghte go ne ryde,	So that he might neither walk nor ride,
But in a chayer men aboute hym bar,	But in a sedan chair men carried him about,
Al forbrused, bothe bak and syde.	All badly bruised, both back and side.
The wreche of God hym smoot so cruelly	The vengeance of God smote him so cruelly
That thurgh his body wikked wormes crepte,	That through his body wicked worms crept,
And therwithal he stank so horribly	And in addition to all that he stank so horribly
That noon of al his meynee that hym kepte,	That no one of all his household that served him,
Wheither so he wook or ellis slepte,	Whether he stayed awake or else slept,
Ne myghte noght the stynk of hym endure.	Could not endure the stink of him.
In this meschief he wayled and eek wepte,	In this affliction he wailed and also wept,
And knew God lord of every creature.	And acknowledged God lord of every creature.
To al his hoost and to hymself also	To all his host and to himself also
Ful wlatsom was the stynk of his careyne;	Full loathsome was the stink of his decaying body;
No man ne myghte hym bere to ne fro.	No man could bear him in any way.
And in this stynk and this horrible peyne,	And in this stink and this horrible pain,
He starf ful wrecchedly in a monteyne.	He died very wretchedly on a mountain.
Thus hath this robbour and this homycide,	Thus has this robber and this homicide,
That many a man made to wepe and pleyne,	That many a man made to weep and mourn,
Swich gerdoun as bilongeth unto pryde.	Such reward as belongs to pride.
De Alexandro	[Concerning Alexander]
The storie of Alisaundre is so commune	The history of Alexander is so commonly known
That every wight that hath discrecioun	That every person who has good judgment
Hath herd somwhat or al of his fortune.	Has heard something or all of his fortune.
This wyde world, as in conclusioun,	This wide world, in the end,
He wan by strengthe, or for his hye renoun	He won by strength, or for his high renown
They weren glad for pees unto hym sende.	They were glad to send unto him (to sue) for peace .
The pride of man and beest he leyde adoun,	The pride of man and beast he laid low,
Wherso he cam, unto the worldes ende.	Wherever he came, unto the world's end.
Comparisoun myghte nevere yet been maked	Comparison might never yet be made
Bitwixe hym and another conquerour;	Between him and another conqueror;
For al this world for drede of hym hath quaked.	For all this world for dread of him has trembled.
He was of knyghthod and of fredom flour;	He was flower of knighthood and of nobility;
Fortune hym made the heir of hire honour.	Fortune made him the heir of her honor.
Save wyn and wommen, no thing myghte aswage	Save wine and women, no thing might assuage
His hye entente in armes and labour,	His noble ambition in arms and struggles,
So was he ful of leonyn corage.	So was he full of leonine courage.
What pris were it to hym, though I yow tolde	What honor were it to him, though I you told
Of Darius, and an hundred thousand mo	Of Darius, and a hundred thousand more
Of kynges, princes, dukes, erles bolde	Of kings, princes, dukes, earls bold
Whiche he conquered, and broghte hem into wo?	Whom he conquered, and brought them into woe?
I seye, as fer as man may ryde or go,	I say, as far as man can ride or walk,
The world was his -- what sholde I moore devyse?	The world was his -- what more should I tell?
For though I write or tolde yow everemo	For though I should write or told you evermore
Of his knyghthod, it myghte nat suffise.	About his knighthood, it could not suffice.
Twelf yeer he regned, as seith Machabee.	Twelve years he reigned, as says Maccabees.
Philippes sone of Macidoyne he was,	He was the son of Philip of Macedonia,
That first was kyng in Grece the contree.	Who first was king in the country of Greece.
O worthy, gentil Alisandre, allas,	O worthy, noble Alexander, alas,
That evere sholde fallen swich a cas!	That ever should befall such a case!
Empoysoned of thyn owene folk thou weere;	Thou were poisoned by thine own folk;
Thy sys Fortune hath turned into aas,	Fortune has turned thy six [highest throw] into an ace [lowest],
And for thee ne weep she never a teere.	And for thee she wept never a tear.
Who shal me yeven teeris to compleyne	Who shall give me tears to complain
The deeth of gentillesse and of franchise,	The death of nobility and of magnanimity,
That al the world weelded in his demeyne,	Who all the world wielded in his control,
And yet hym thoughte it myghte nat suffise?	And yet it seemed to him it might not suffice?
So ful was his corage of heigh emprise.	So full was his disposition of high knightly prowess.
Allas, who shal me helpe to endite	Alas, who shall me help to indict
False Fortune, and poyson to despise,	False Fortune, and to despise poison,
The whiche two of al this wo I wyte?	The which two for all this woe I blame?
De Julio Cesare	Concerning Julius Caesar
By wisedom, manhede, and by greet labour,	By wisdom, manhood, and by great labor,
From humble bed to roial magestee	From humble bed to royal majesty
Up roos he Julius, the conquerour,	Up rose this Julius, the conqueror,
That wan al th' occident by land and see,	That won all the west by land and sea,
By strengthe of hand, or elles by tretee,	By strength of hand, or else by treaty,
And unto Rome made hem tributarie;	And unto Rome made them tributary;
And sitthe of Rome the emperour was he	And afterwards of Rome the emperor was he
Til that Fortune weex his adversarie.	Until Fortune became his adversary.
O myghty Cesar, that in Thessalie	O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
Agayn Pompeus, fader thyn in lawe,	Against Pompey, thy father in law,
That of the orient hadde al the chivalrie	Who of the east had all the dominion by conquest
As fer as that the day bigynneth dawe,	As far as where the day begins to dawn,
Thou thurgh thy knyghthod hast hem take and slawe,	Thou through thy knighthood hast them taken and slain,
Save fewe folk that with Pompeus fledde,	Save for a few folk that fled with Pompey,
Thurgh which thou puttest al th' orient in awe.	Through which thou puttest all the east in awe.
Thanke Fortune, that so wel thee spedde!	Thank Fortune, that so well helped thee to succeed!
But now a litel while I wol biwaille	But now for a little while I will bewail
This Pompeus, this noble governour	This Pompey, this noble governor
Of Rome, which that fleigh at this bataille.	Of Rome, who fled at this battle.
I seye, oon of his men, a fals traitour,	I say, one of his men, a false traitor,
His heed of smoot, to wynnen hym favour	His head off smote, to win himself favor
Of Julius, and hym the heed he broghte.	Of Julius, and he brought him the head.
Allas, Pompeye, of th' orient conquerour,	Alas, Pompey, of the east conqueror,
That Fortune unto swich a fyn thee broghte!	That Fortune unto such an end thee brought!
To Rome agayn repaireth Julius	To Rome again repairs Julius
With his triumphe, lauriat ful hye;	With his triumphal procession, very nobly crowned with laurel;
But on a tyme Brutus Cassius,	But on a time Brutus Cassius,
That evere hadde of his hye estaat envye,	Who ever had envy of his high estate,
Ful prively hath maad conspiracye	Full secretly has made conspiracy
Agayns this Julius in subtil wise,	Against this Julius in a cunning manner,
And caste the place in which he sholde dye	And planned the place in which he should die
With boydekyns, as I shal yow devyse.	With daggers, as I shall tell you.
This Julius to the Capitolie wente	This Julius to the Capitol went
Upon a day, as he was wont to goon,	Upon one day, as he was accustomed to go,
And in the Capitolie anon hym hente	And in the Capitol straightway seized him
This false Brutus and his othere foon,	This false Brutus and his other foes,
And stiked hym with boydekyns anoon	And stuck him with daggers straightway
With many a wounde, and thus they lete hym lye;	With many a wound, and thus they let him lie;
But nevere gronte he at no strook but oon,	But never groaned he at no stroke but one,
Or elles at two, but if his storie lye.	Or else at two, unless his history lies.
So manly was this Julius of herte,	So manly was this Julius of heart,
And so wel lovede estaatly honestee,	And so well loved dignified decency,
That though his deedly woundes soore smerte,	That though his deadly wounds sorely pained,
His mantel over his hypes caste he,	His mantle over his hips cast he,
For no man sholde seen his privetee;	So that no man should see his private parts;
And as he lay of diyng in a traunce,	And as he lay a-dying in a trance,
And wiste verraily that deed was hee,	And knew truly that he was dead,
Of honestee yet hadde he remembraunce.	Of decency yet had he remembrance.
Lucan, to thee this storie I recomende,	Lucan, to thee this history I commend,
And to Swetoun, and to Valerius also,	And to Suetonius, and to Valerius also,
That of this storie writen word and ende,	That of this history wrote beginning and end,
How that to thise grete conqueroures two	How to these two great conquerors
Fortune was first freend, and sitthe foo.	Fortune was first friend, and afterwards foe.
No man ne truste upon hire favour longe,	Let no man trust upon her favor long,
But have hire in awayt for everemoo;	But keep an eye on her for evermore;
Witnesse on alle thise conqueroures stronge.	Take note of all these conquerors strong.
Cresus	Croesus
This riche Cresus, whilom kyng of Lyde,	This rich Croesus, once king of Lydia,
Of which Cresus Cirus soore hym dradde,	Of which Croesus Cyrus was sorely afraid,
Yet was he caught amyddes al his pryde,	Yet was he caught amidst all his pride,
And to be brent men to the fyr hym ladde.	And to be burned men led him to the fire.
But swich a reyn doun fro the welkne shadde	But such a rain down from the sky poured
That slow the fyr, and made hym to escape;	That killed the fire, and allowed him to escape;
But to be war no grace yet he hadde,	But to be wary (of Fortune) no grace yet he had,
Til Fortune on the galwes made hym gape.	Until Fortune on the gallows made him gape.
Whanne he escaped was, he kan nat stente	When he had escaped, he can not stop
For to bigynne a newe werre agayn.	Beginning a new war again.
He wende wel, for that Fortune hym sente	He well believed, because Fortune sent him
Swich hap that he escaped thurgh the rayn,	Such luck that he escaped by means of the rain,
That of his foos he myghte nat be slayn;	That of his foes he could not be slain;
And eek a sweven upon a nyght he mette,	And also a dream upon one night he dreamed,
Of which he was so proud and eek so fayn	Of which he was so proud and also so pleased
That in vengeance he al his herte sette.	That in vengeance he set all his heart.
Upon a tree he was, as that hym thoughte,	Upon a tree he was, as it seemed to him,
Ther Juppiter hym wessh, bothe bak and syde,	Where Jupiter washed him, both back and side,
And Phebus eek a fair towaille hym broughte	And Phoebus also brought him a fair towel
To dryen hym with; and therfore wax his pryde,	To dry himself with; and therefore his pride grew,
And to his doghter, that stood hym bisyde,	And to his daughter, who stood him beside,
Which that he knew in heigh sentence habounde,	Whom he knew to abound in good judgment,
He bad hire telle hym what it signyfyde,	He bad her tell him what it signified,
And she his dreem bigan right thus expounde:	And she began right thus to expound his dream:
"The tree," quod she, "the galwes is to meene,	"The tree," said she, "is to signify the gallows,
And Juppiter bitokneth snow and reyn,	And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,
And Phebus, with his towaille so clene,	And Phoebus, with his towel so clean,
Tho been the sonne stremes for to seyn.	Those are to say the sun beams.
Thou shalt anhanged be, fader, certeyn;	Thou shalt be hanged, father, certainly;
Reyn shal thee wasshe, and sonne shal thee drye."	Rain shall thee wash, and sun shall thee dry."
Thus warned hym ful plat and ek ful pleyn	Thus warned him very bluntly and also very plainly
His doghter, which that called was Phanye.	His daughter, who was called Phanye.
Anhanged was Cresus, the proude kyng;	Hanged was Cresus, the proud king;
His roial trone myghte hym nat availle.	His royal throne could not help him.
Tragedies noon oother maner thyng	Tragedies no other sort of thing
Ne kan in syngyng crie ne biwaille	Can in singing cry nor bewail (anything)
But that Fortune alwey wole assaille	But that Fortune always will assail
With unwar strook the regnes that been proude;	With unexpected stroke the reigns that are proud;
For whan men trusteth hire, thanne wol she faille,	For when men trust her, then will she fail,
And covere hire brighte face with a clowde.	And cover her bright face with a cloud.
Heere folwen the wordes betwene the Hoost and the Millere	Here follow the words between the Host and the Miller
Whan that the Knyght had thus his tale ytoold,	When the Knight had thus told his tale,
In al the route nas ther yong ne oold	In all the company there was no one young nor old
That he ne seyde it was a noble storie	Who did not say it was a noble story
And worthy for to drawen to memorie,	And worthy to draw into memory,
And namely the gentils everichon.	And especially the gentlefolk every one.
Oure Hooste lough and swoor, "So moot I gon,	Our Host laughed and swore, "As I may move about (I swear),
This gooth aright; unbokeled is the male.	This goes well; the bag is opened.
Lat se now who shal telle another tale;	Let's see now who shall tell another tale;
For trewely the game is wel bigonne.	For truly the game is well begun.
Now telleth ye, sir Monk, if that ye konne,	Now tell you, sir Monk, if you can,
Somwhat to quite with the Knyghtes tale."	Something to equal the Knight's tale."
The Millere, that for dronken was al pale,	The Miller, who for drunkenness was all pale,
So that unnethe upon his hors he sat,	So that he hardly sat upon his horse,
He nolde avalen neither hood ne hat,	He would not doff neither hood nor hat,
Ne abyde no man for his curteisie,	Nor give preference to any man out of courtesy,
But in Pilates voys he gan to crie,	But in Pilate's voice he began to cry,
And swoor, "By armes, and by blood and bones,	And swore, "By (Christ's) arms, and by blood and bones,
I kan a noble tale for the nones,	I know a noble tale for this occasion,
With which I wol now quite the Knyghtes tale."	With which I will now requite the Knight's tale."
Oure Hooste saugh that he was dronke of ale,	Our Host saw that he was drunk on ale,
And seyde, "Abyd, Robyn, my leeve brother;	And said, "Wait, Robin, my dear brother;
Som bettre man shal telle us first another.	Some better man shall first tell us another.
Abyd, and lat us werken thriftily."	Wait, and let us act properly."
"By Goddes soule," quod he, "that wol nat I;	"By God's soul," said he, "that will not I;
For I wol speke or elles go my wey."	For I will speak or else go my way."
Oure Hoost answerde, "Tel on, a devel wey!	Our Host answered, "Tell on, in the devil's name!
Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."	Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."
"Now herkneth," quod the Millere, "alle and some!	"Now listen," said the Miller, "everyone!
But first I make a protestacioun	But first I make a protestation
That I am dronke; I knowe it by my soun.	That I am drunk; I know it by my sound.
And therfore if that I mysspeke or seye,	And therefore if that I misspeak or say (amiss),
Wyte it the ale of Southwerk, I you preye.	Blame it on ale of Southwerk, I you pray.
For I wol telle a legende and a lyf	For I will tell a legend and a life
Bothe of a carpenter and of his wyf,	Both of a carpenter and of his wife,
How that a clerk hath set the wrightes cappe."	How a clerk has set the carpenter's cap (fooled him)."
The Reve answerde and seyde, "Stynt thy clappe!	The Reeve answered and said, "Hold your tongue!
Lat be thy lewed dronken harlotrye.	Let be thy ignorant drunken ribaldry.
It is a synne and eek a greet folye	It is a sin and also a great folly
To apeyren any man, or hym defame,	To slander any man, or defame him,
And eek to bryngen wyves in swich fame.	And also to bring wives in such ill fame.
Thou mayst ynogh of othere thynges seyn."	Thou canst say enough about other things."
This dronke Millere spak ful soone ageyn	This drunken Miller spoke very quickly in reply
And seyde, "Leve brother Osewold,	And said, "Dear brother Oswald,
Who hath no wyf, he is no cokewold.	He who has no wife, he is no cuckold.
But I sey nat therfore that thou art oon;	But I say not therefore that thou art one;
Ther been ful goode wyves many oon,	There are very good wives, many a one,
And evere a thousand goode ayeyns oon badde.	And ever a thousand good against one bad.
That knowestow wel thyself, but if thou madde.	Thou knowest that well thyself, unless thou art mad.
Why artow angry with my tale now?	Why art thou angry with my tale now?
I have a wyf, pardee, as wel as thow;	I have a wife, by God, as well as thou;
Yet nolde I, for the oxen in my plogh,	Yet I would not, for the oxen in my plow,
Take upon me moore than ynogh,	Take upon me more than enough (trouble),
As demen of myself that I were oon;	As to believe of myself that I were one (a cuckold);
I wol bileve wel that I am noon.	I will believe well that I am not one.
An housbonde shal nat been inquisityf	A husband must not be inquisitive
Of Goddes pryvetee, nor of his wyf.	Of God's secrets, nor of his wife.
So he may fynde Goddes foyson there,	So long as he can find God's plenty there,
Of the remenant nedeth nat enquere."	Of the rest he needs not enquire."
What sholde I moore seyn, but this Millere	What more should I say, but this Miller
He nolde his wordes for no man forbere,	He would not refrain from speaking for any man,
But tolde his cherles tale in his manere.	But told his churl's tale in his manner.
M'athynketh that I shal reherce it heere.	I regret that I must repeat it here.
And therfore every gentil wight I preye,	And therefore every respectable person I pray,
For Goddes love, demeth nat that I seye	For God's love, think not that I speak
Of yvel entente, but for I moot reherce	Out of evil intention, but because I must repeat
Hir tales alle, be they bettre or werse,	All their tales, be they better or worse,
Or elles falsen som of my mateere.	Or else (I must) falsify some of my material.
And therfore, whoso list it nat yheere,	And therefore, whoever does not want to hear it,
Turne over the leef and chese another tale;	Turn over the leaf and choose another tale;
For he shal fynde ynowe, grete and smale,	For he shall find enough, of every sort,
Of storial thyng that toucheth gentillesse,	Of historical matter that concerns nobility,
And eek moralitee and hoolynesse.	And also morality and holiness.
Blameth nat me if that ye chese amys.	Blame not me if you choose amiss.
The Millere is a cherl; ye knowe wel this.	The Miller is a churl; you know this well.
So was the Reve eek and othere mo,	So was the Reeve also and many others,
And harlotrie they tolden bothe two.	And ribaldry they told, both of the two.
Avyseth yow, and put me out of blame;	Think about this, and don't blame me;
And eek men shal nat maken ernest of game.	And also people should not take a joke too seriously.
Heere bigynneth the Millere his tale.	Here begins The Miller's Tale.
Whilom ther was dwellynge at Oxenford	There was once dwelling at Oxford
A riche gnof, that gestes heeld to bord,	A rich churl, who took in boarders,
And of his craft he was a carpenter.	And of his craft he was a carpenter.
With hym ther was dwellynge a poure scoler,	With him there was dwelling a poor scholar,
Hadde lerned art, but al his fantasye	Who had learned the arts curriculum, but all his desire
Was turned for to lerne astrologye,	Was turned to learning astrology,
And koude a certeyn of conclusiouns,	And he knew a certain (number of) of astronomical operations,
To demen by interrogaciouns,	To determine by scientific calculations,
If that men asked hym, in certein houres	If men asked him, in specific (astronomical) hours
Whan that men sholde have droghte or elles shoures,	When men should have drought or else showers,
Or if men asked hym what sholde bifalle	Or if people asked him what should happen
Of every thyng; I may nat rekene hem alle.	Concerning every thing; I can not reckon them all.
This clerk was cleped hende Nicholas.	This clerk was called clever Nicholas.
Of deerne love he koude and of solas;	Of secret love he knew and of its satisfaction;
And therto he was sleigh and ful privee,	And moreover he was sly and very discreet,
And lyk a mayden meke for to see.	And like a maiden meek in appearance.
A chambre hadde he in that hostelrye	A room had he in that hostelry
Allone, withouten any compaignye,	Alone, without any company,
Ful fetisly ydight with herbes swoote;	Very elegantly strewn with sweet-smelling herbs;
And he hymself as sweete as is the roote	And he himself as sweet as is the root
Of lycorys or any cetewale.	Of licorice or any zedoary (a ginger-like herb).
His Almageste, and bookes grete and smale,	His Almagest, and books large and small,
His astrelabie, longynge for his art,	His astrolabe, belonging to his art (of astronomy),
His augrym stones layen faire apart,	His counting stones (for his abacus) lie neatly apart,
On shelves couched at his beddes heed;	Arranged on shelves at his bed's head;
His presse ycovered with a faldyng reed;	His linen press covered with a red woolen cloth;
And al above ther lay a gay sautrie,	And all above there lay a fine psaltery,
On which he made a-nyghtes melodie	On which at night he made melody
So swetely that all the chambre rong;	So sweetly that all the room rang;
And Angelus ad virginem he song;	And "The Angel to the Virgin" he sang;
And after that he song the Kynges Noote.	And after that he sang the King's Tune.
Ful often blessed was his myrie throte.	Very often his merry throat was blessed.
And thus this sweete clerk his tyme spente	And thus this sweet clerk spent his time
After his freendes fyndyng and his rente.	Living on his friends' support and his (own) income.
This carpenter hadde wedded newe a wyf,	This carpenter had recently wedded a wife,
Which that he lovede moore than his lyf;	Whom he loved more than his life;
Of eighteteene yeer she was of age.	She was eighteen years of age.
Jalous he was, and heeld hire narwe in cage,	Jealous he was, and held her narrowly in confinement,
For she was wylde and yong, and he was old	For she was wild and young, and he was old
And demed hymself been lik a cokewold.	And believed himself likely to be a cuckold.
He knew nat Catoun, for his wit was rude,	He knew not Cato, for his wit was rude,
That bad man sholde wedde his simylitude.	Who advised that man should wed his equal.
Men sholde wedden after hire estaat,	Men should wed according to their status in life,
For youthe and elde is often at debaat.	For youth and old age are often in conflict.
But sith that he was fallen in the snare,	But since he was fallen in the snare,
He moste endure, as oother folk, his care.	He must endure, like other folk, his troubles.
Fair was this yonge wyf, and therwithal	Fair was this young wife, and moreover
As any wezele hir body gent and smal.	As any weasel was her body graceful and slender.
A ceynt she werede, barred al of silk,	A belt she wore, with decorative strips all of silk,
A barmclooth as whit as morne milk	An apron as white as morning milk
Upon hir lendes, ful of many a goore.	Upon her loins, full of many a flounce.
Whit was hir smok, and broyden al bifoore	White was her smock, and embroidered all in front
And eek bihynde, on hir coler aboute,	And also behind, around her collar,
Of col-blak silk, withinne and eek withoute.	With coal-black silk, within and also without.
The tapes of hir white voluper	The ribbons of her white cap
Were of the same suyte of hir coler;	Were of the same color as her collar;
Hir filet brood of silk, and set ful hye.	Her headband broad of silk, and set very high.
And sikerly she hadde a likerous ye;	And surely she had a wanton eye;
Ful smale ypulled were hire browes two,	Her two eyebrows were plucked very thin,
And tho were bent and blake as any sloo.	And those were bent and black as any sloe.
She was ful moore blisful on to see	She was much more blissful to look upon
Than is the newe pere-jonette tree,	Than is the new early-ripe pear tree,
And softer than the wolle is of a wether.	And softer than the wool is of a sheep.
And by hir girdel heeng a purs of lether,	And by her girdle hung a purse of leather,
Tasseled with silk and perled with latoun.	Tasseled with silk and ornamented with latten "pearls."
In al this world, to seken up and doun,	In all this world, to seek up and down,
There nys no man so wys that koude thenche	There is no man so wise that he could imagine
So gay a popelote or swich a wenche.	So lovely a little doll or such a wench.
Ful brighter was the shynyng of hir hewe	Much brighter was the shining of her complexion
Than in the Tour the noble yforged newe.	Than the newly minted noble in the Tower.
But of hir song, it was as loude and yerne	But of her song, it was as loud and lively
As any swalwe sittynge on a berne.	As any swallow sitting on a barn.
Therto she koude skippe and make game,	Moreover she could skip and play,
As any kyde or calf folwynge his dame.	Like any kid or calf following its mother.
Hir mouth was sweete as bragot or the meeth,	Her mouth was sweet as ale and honey or mead,
Or hoord of apples leyd in hey or heeth.	Or a hoard of apples laid in hay or heather.
Wynsynge she was, as is a joly colt,	Skittish she was, as is a spirited colt,
Long as a mast, and upright as a bolt.	Tall as a mast, and straight as an arrow.
A brooch she baar upon hir lowe coler,	A brooch she wore upon her low collar,
As brood as is the boos of a bokeler.	As broad as is the boss of a shield.
Hir shoes were laced on hir legges hye.	Her shoes were laced high on her legs.
She was a prymerole, a piggesnye,	She was a primrose, a pig's eye (a flower),
For any lord to leggen in his bedde,	For any lord to lay in his bed,
Or yet for any good yeman to wedde.	Or yet for any good yeoman to wed.
Now, sire, and eft, sire, so bifel the cas	Now, sir, and again, sir, it so happened
That on a day this hende Nicholas	That one day this clever Nicholas
Fil with this yonge wyf to rage and pleye,	Happened with this young wife to flirt and play,
Whil that hir housbonde was at Oseneye,	While her husband was at Oseneye,
As clerkes ben ful subtile and ful queynte;	For clerks are very subtle and very clever;
And prively he caughte hire by the queynte,	And intimately he caught her by her crotch,
And seyde, "Ywis, but if ich have my wille,	And said, "Indeed, unless I have my will,
For deerne love of thee, lemman, I spille."	For secret love of thee, sweetheart, I die."
And heeld hire harde by the haunchebones,	And held her hard by the thigh,
And seyde, "Lemman, love me al atones,	And said, "Sweetheart, love me immediately
Or I wol dyen, also God me save!"	Or I will die, so save me God!"
And she sproong as a colt dooth in the trave,	And she sprang as a colt does when restrained,
And with hir heed she wryed faste awey,	And with her head she twisted fast away,
And seyde, "I wol nat kisse thee, by my fey!	And said, "I will not kiss thee, by my faith!
Why, lat be!" quod she. "Lat be, Nicholas,	Why, let me be!" said she. "Let me be, Nicholas,
Or I wol crie `out, harrow' and `allas'!	Or I will cry `out, help' and `alas'!
Do wey youre handes, for youre curteisye!"	Take away your hands, for your courtesy!"
This Nicholas gan mercy for to crye,	This Nicholas began to cry for mercy,
And spak so faire, and profred him so faste,	And spoke so fair, and pressed his suit so fast,
That she hir love hym graunted atte laste,	That she granted him her love at the last,
And swoor hir ooth, by Seint Thomas of Kent,	And swore her oath, by Saint Thomas of Kent,
That she wol been at his comandement,	That she will be at his commandment,
Whan that she may hir leyser wel espie.	When she may well espy her opportunity.
"Myn housbonde is so ful of jalousie	"My husband is so full of jealousy
That but ye wayte wel and been privee,	That unless you wait patiently and are secretive,
I woot right wel I nam but deed," quod she.	I know right well I am as good as dead," said she.
"Ye moste been ful deerne, as in this cas."	"You must been very secret in this matter."
"Nay, therof care thee noght," quod Nicholas.	"No, care thee not about that," said Nicholas.
"A clerk hadde litherly biset his whyle,	"A clerk had badly wasted his time (studying),
But if he koude a carpenter bigyle."	If he could not outwit a carpenter."
And thus they been accorded and ysworn	And thus they are agreed and sworn
To wayte a tyme, as I have told biforn.	To wait for a time, as I have told before.
Whan Nicholas had doon thus everideel	When Nicholas had done thus every bit
And thakked hire aboute the lendes weel,	And well patted her about the loins,
He kiste hire sweete and taketh his sawtrie,	He kissed her sweetly and takes his psaltery,
And pleyeth faste, and maketh melodie.	And plays fast, and makes melody.
Thanne fil it thus, that to the paryssh chirche,	Then it thus happened, that to the parish church,
Cristes owene werkes for to wirche,	Christ's own works to do,
This goode wyf went on an haliday.	This good wife went on a holiday.
Hir forheed shoon as bright as any day,	Her forehead shone as bright as any day,
So was it wasshen whan she leet hir werk.	It was so washed when she left her work.
Now was ther of that chirche a parissh clerk,	Now was there of that church a parish clerk,
The which that was ycleped Absolon.	Who was called Absolon.
Crul was his heer, and as the gold it shoon,	Curly was his hair, and as the gold it shone,
And strouted as a fanne large and brode;	And stretched out like a fan large and broad;
Ful streight and evene lay his joly shode.	Very straight and even lay his elegant parted hair.
His rode was reed, his eyen greye as goos.	His complexion was ruddy, his eyes gray as a goose.
With Poules wyndow corven on his shoos,	With St. Paul's window carved on his shoes,
In hoses rede he wente fetisly.	In red hose he went elegantly.
Yclad he was ful smal and proprely	Clad he was very trimly and properly
Al in a kirtel of a lyght waget;	All in a tunic of a light blue;
Ful faire and thikke been the poyntes set.	Very fair and thick are the laces set.
And therupon he hadde a gay surplys	And over that he had a gay surplice
As whit as is the blosme upon the rys.	As white as is the blossom upon the branch.
A myrie child he was, so God me save.	A merry lad he was, so save me God.
Wel koude he laten blood, and clippe and shave,	Well could he draw blood, and cut hair and shave,
And maken a chartre of lond or acquitaunce.	And make a charter of land or a legal release.
In twenty manere koude he trippe and daunce	In twenty different ways could he trip and dance
After the scole of Oxenforde tho,	After the school of Oxford as it was then,
And with his legges casten to and fro,	And with his legs kick to and fro,
And pleyen songes on a smal rubible;	And play songs on a small fiddle,
Therto he song som tyme a loud quynyble;	To which he some times sang a loud high treble;
And as wel koude he pleye on a giterne.	And he could play as well on a guitar.
In al the toun nas brewhous ne taverne	In all the town there was no brew house nor tavern
That he ne visited with his solas,	That he did not visit with his entertainment,
Ther any gaylard tappestere was.	Where any merry barmaid was.
But sooth to seyn, he was somdeel squaymous	But to say the truth, he was somewhat squeamish
Of fartyng, and of speche daungerous.	About farting, and fastidious in his speech.
This Absolon, that jolif was and gay,	This Absolon, who was elegant and gay,
Gooth with a sencer on the haliday,	Goes with a censer on the holiday,
Sensynge the wyves of the parisshe faste;	Censing the wives of the parish eagerly;
And many a lovely look on hem he caste,	And many a lovely look he cast on them,
And namely on this carpenteris wyf.	And especially on this carpenter's wife.
To looke on hire hym thoughte a myrie lyf,	To look on her he thought a merry life,
She was so propre and sweete and likerous.	She was so attractive and sweet and flirtatious.
I dar wel seyn, if she hadde been a mous,	I dare well say, if she had been a mouse,
And he a cat, he wolde hire hente anon.	And he a cat, he would have grabbed her at once.
This parissh clerk, this joly Absolon,	This parish clerk, this elegant Absolon,
Hath in his herte swich a love-longynge	Has in his heart such a love-longing
That of no wyf took he noon offrynge;	That of no wife took he any offering;
For curteisie, he seyde, he wolde noon.	For courtesy, he said, he would have none.
The moone, whan it was nyght, ful brighte shoon,	The moon, when it was night, very brightly shone,
And Absolon his gyterne hath ytake;	And Absolon his guitar has taken;
For paramours he thoghte for to wake.	For the sake of love he intended to stay awake.
And forth he gooth, jolif and amorous,	And forth he goes, elegant and amorous,
Til he cam to the carpenteres hous	Until he came to the carpenter's house
A litel after cokkes hadde ycrowe,	A little after cocks had crowed,
And dressed hym up by a shot-wyndowe	And took his place up by a casement window
That was upon the carpenteris wal.	That was upon the carpenter's wall.
He syngeth in his voys gentil and smal,	He sings in his voice gentle and high,
"Now, deere lady, if thy wille be,	"Now, dear lady, if it be thy will,
I praye yow that ye wole rewe on me,"	I pray yow that you will have pity on me,"
Ful wel acordaunt to his gyternynge.	Very well in harmony with his guitar-playing.
This carpenter awook, and herde him synge,	This carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,
And spak unto his wyf, and seyde anon,	And spoke unto his wife, and said at once,
"What! Alison! Herestow nat Absolon,	"What! Alison! Hearest thou not Absolon,
That chaunteth thus under oure boures wal?"	That chants thus next to our bedroom's wall?"
And she answerde hir housbonde therwithal,	And she answered her husband immediately,
"Yis, God woot, John, I heere it every deel."	"Yes indeed, God knows, John, I hear it every bit."
This passeth forth; what wol ye bet than weel?	This goes on; what more would you have?
Fro day to day this joly Absolon	From day to day this elegant Absolon
So woweth hire that hym is wo bigon.	So woos her that he is in a sorry state.
He waketh al the nyght and al the day;	He stays awake all the night and all the day;
He kembeth his lokkes brode, and made hym gay;	He combs his flowing locks, and dressed himself elegantly;
He woweth hire by meenes and brocage,	He woos her by go-betweens and agents,
And swoor he wolde been hir owene page;	And swore he would be her own servant;
He syngeth, brokkynge as a nyghtyngale;	He sings, trilling like a nightingale;
He sente hire pyment, meeth, and spiced ale,	He sent her sweetened wine, mead, and spiced ale,
And wafres, pipyng hoot out of the gleede;	And wafers, piping hot out of the fire;
And, for she was of town, he profred meede;	And, because she was a townie, he offered money;
For som folk wol ben wonnen for richesse,	For some folk will be won for riches,
And somme for strokes, and somme for gentillesse.	And some by force, and some for noble character.
Somtyme, to shewe his lightnesse and maistrye,	Sometimes, to show his agility and skill,
He pleyeth Herodes upon a scaffold hye.	He plays Herod upon a high stage.
But what availleth hym as in this cas?	But what good does it do him in this case?
She loveth so this hende Nicholas	She so loves this clever Nicholas
That Absolon may blowe the bukkes horn;	That Absolon may go whistle;
He ne hadde for his labour but a scorn.	He had for his labor nothing but scorn.
And thus she maketh Absolon hire ape,	And thus she makes Absolon her fool,
And al his ernest turneth til a jape.	And turns all his earnestness into a joke.
Ful sooth is this proverbe, it is no lye,	Very true is this proverb, it is no lie,
Men seyn right thus: "Alwey the nye slye	Men say right thus: "Always the nearby sly one
Maketh the ferre leeve to be looth."	Makes the distant loved one to be disliked."
For though that Absolon be wood or wrooth,	For though Absolon be crazed or angry,
By cause that he fer was from hire sight,	Because he was far from her sight,
This nye Nicholas stood in his light.	This nearby Nicholas cast him in the shadow.
Now ber thee wel, thou hende Nicholas,	Now bear thyself well, thou clever Nicholas,
For Absolon may waille and synge "allas."	For Absolon may wail and sing "alas."
And so bifel it on a Saterday,	And so it happened on a Saturday,
This carpenter was goon til Osenay;	This carpenter was gone to Osenay;
And hende Nicholas and Alisoun	And clever Nicholas and Alisoun
Acorded been to this conclusioun,	Are agreed on this plan,
That Nicholas shal shapen hym a wyle	That Nicholas shall devise a trick
This sely jalous housbonde to bigyle;	To beguile this hapless jealous husband;
And if so be the game wente aright,	And if it so be the game went right,
She sholde slepen in his arm al nyght,	She should sleep in his arms all night,
For this was his desir and hire also.	For this was his desire and hers also.
And right anon, withouten wordes mo,	And right away, without more words,
This Nicholas no lenger wolde tarie,	This Nicholas no longer would tarry,
But dooth ful softe unto his chambre carie	But has carried very quietly unto his chamber
Bothe mete and drynke for a day or tweye,	Both food and drink for a day or two,
And to hire housbonde bad hire for to seye,	And told her to say to her husband,
If that he axed after Nicholas,	If he asked about Nicholas,
She sholde seye she nyste where he was;	She should say she knew not where he was;
Of al that day she saugh hym nat with ye;	Of all that day she saw him not with eye;
She trowed that he was in maladye,	She believed that he was ill,
For, for no cry hir mayde koude hym calle,	Because, for no shout could her maid call him,
He nolde answere for thyng that myghte falle.	He would not answer for anything that might befall.
This passeth forth al thilke Saterday,	This goes on all that same Saturday,
That Nicholas stille in his chambre lay,	That Nicholas still in his chamber lay,
And eet and sleep, or dide what hym leste,	And ate and slept, or did what he pleased,
Til Sonday, that the sonne gooth to reste.	Until Sunday, when the sun goes to rest.
This sely carpenter hath greet merveyle	This hapless carpenter has great marvel
Of Nicholas, or what thyng myghte hym eyle,	About Nicholas, or what thing might ail him,
And seyde, "I am adrad, by Seint Thomas,	And said, "I am afraid, by Saint Thomas,
It stondeth nat aright with Nicholas.	Things are not right with Nicholas.
God shilde that he deyde sodeynly!	God forbid that he should suddenly die!
This world is now ful tikel, sikerly.	This world is now very ticklish, surely.
I saugh today a cors yborn to chirche	I saw today a corpse carried to church
That now, on Monday last, I saugh hym wirche.	That just now, on last Monday, I saw him work.
"Go up," quod he unto his knave anoon,	"Go up," he said unto his servant at once,
"Clepe at his dore, or knokke with a stoon.	"Call at his door, or knock with a stone.
Looke how it is, and tel me boldely."	Look how it is, and tell me quickly."
This knave gooth hym up ful sturdily,	This servant goes up very resolutely,
And at the chambre dore whil that he stood,	And at the chamber door while he stood,
He cride and knokked as that he were wood,	He cried and knocked as if he were crazy,
"What, how! What do ye, maister Nicholay?	"What, hey! What do you, master Nicholay?
How may ye slepen al the longe day?"	How can you sleep all the long day?"
But al for noght; he herde nat a word.	But all for naught; he heard not a word.
An hole he foond, ful lowe upon a bord,	He found a hole, very low upon a board,
Ther as the cat was wont in for to crepe,	Where the cat was accustomed to creep in,
And at that hole he looked in ful depe,	And through that hole he looked in very carefully,
And at the laste he hadde of hym a sight.	And at the last he had a sight of him.
This Nicholas sat evere capyng upright,	This Nicholas sat ever gaping upward,
As he had kiked on the newe moone.	As if he were gazing on the new moon.
Adoun he gooth, and tolde his maister soone	Down he goes, and told his master immediately
In what array he saugh this ilke man.	In what condition he saw this same man.
This carpenter to blessen hym bigan,	This carpenter began to bless himself,
And seyde, "Help us, Seinte Frydeswyde!	And said, "Help us, Saint Frideswide!
A man woot litel what hym shal bityde.	A man knows little what shall happen to him.
This man is falle, with his astromye,	This man is fallen, because of his astronomy,
In some woodnesse or in som agonye.	In some madness or in some fit.
I thoghte ay wel how that it sholde be!	I always thought well how it should be!
Men sholde nat knowe of Goddes pryvetee.	Men should not know of God's secrets.
Ye, blessed be alwey a lewed man	Yes, blessed be always an unlearned man
That noght but oonly his bileve kan!	Who knows nothing but only his belief!
So ferde another clerk with astromye;	So fared another clerk with astronomy;
He walked in the feeldes for to prye	He walked in the fields to look
Upon the sterres, what ther sholde bifalle,	Upon the stars, (to find) there what should happen,
Til he was in a marle-pit yfalle;	Until he was fallen in a fertilizer pit;
He saugh nat that. But yet, by Seint Thomas,	He did not see that. But yet, by Saint Thomas,
Me reweth soore of hende Nicholas.	I feel very sorry for clever Nicholas.
He shal be rated of his studiyng,	He shall be scolded for his studying,
If that I may, by Jhesus, hevene kyng!	If that I may, by Jesus, heaven's king!
Get me a staf, that I may underspore,	Get me a staff, that I may pry up from below,
Whil that thou, Robyn, hevest up the dore.	While thou, Robyn, lift up the door.
He shal out of his studiyng, as I gesse."	He shall (come) out of his studying, as I guess."
And to the chambre dore he gan hym dresse.	And to the chamber door he turned his attention.
His knave was a strong carl for the nones,	His servant was a strong fellow for this purpose,
And by the haspe he haaf it of atones;	And by the hasp he heaved it off at once;
Into the floor the dore fil anon.	Onto the floor the door fell straightway.
This Nicholas sat ay as stille as stoon,	This Nicholas sat ever as still as stone,
And evere caped upward into the eir.	And ever gaped upward into the air.
This carpenter wende he were in despeir,	This carpenter supposed he was in despair,
And hente hym by the sholdres myghtily,	And seized him by the shoulders vigorously,
And shook hym harde, and cride spitously,	And shook him hard, and cried loudly,
"What! Nicholay! What, how! What, looke adoun!	"What! Nicholay! What, how! What, look down!
Awak, and thenk on Cristes passioun!	Awake, and think on Christ's passion!
I crouche thee from elves and fro wightes."	I bless thee from elves and from evil creatures."
Therwith the nyght-spel seyde he anon-rightes	Therewith the night-charm he said straightway
On foure halves of the hous aboute,	On four corners of the house about,
And on the thresshfold of the dore withoute:	And on the threshold of the door outside:
"Jhesu Crist and Seinte Benedight,	"Jesus Christ and Saint Benedict,
Blesse this hous from every wikked wight,	Bless this house from every wicked creature,
For nyghtes verye, the white pater-noster!	For evil spirits of the nights, the white pater-noster!
Where wentestow, Seinte Petres soster?"	Where went thou, Saint Peter's sister?"
And atte laste this hende Nicholas	And at the last this clever Nicholas
Gan for to sik soore, and seyde, "Allas!	Began to sigh deeply, and said, "Alas!
Shal al the world be lost eftsoones now?"	Shall all the world be lost right now?"
This carpenter answerde, "What seystow?	This carpenter answered, "What sayest thou?
What! Thynk on God, as we doon, men that swynke."	What! Think on God, as we do, men who work."
This Nicholas answerde, "Fecche me drynke,	This Nicholas answered, "Fetch me drink,
And after wol I speke in pryvetee	And after will I speak in private
Of certeyn thyng that toucheth me and thee.	About a certain matter that concerns me and thee.
I wol telle it noon oother man, certeyn."	I will tell it to no other man, certainly."
This carpenter goth doun, and comth ageyn,	This carpenter goes down, and comes again,
And broghte of myghty ale a large quart;	And brought of strong ale a large quart;
And whan that ech of hem had dronke his part,	And when each of them had drunk his part,
This Nicholas his dore faste shette,	This Nicholas shut fast his door,
And doun the carpenter by hym he sette.	And the carpenter sat down by him.
He seyde, "John, myn hooste, lief and deere,	He said, "John, my host, beloved and dear,
Thou shalt upon thy trouthe swere me heere	Thou shalt upon thy pledged word swear to me here
That to no wight thou shalt this conseil wreye,	That to no person thou shalt this counsel reveal,
For it is Cristes conseil that I seye,	For it is Christ's secrets that I say,
And if thou telle it man, thou art forlore;	And if thou tell it to anyone, thou art completely lost;
For this vengeaunce thou shalt han therfore,	For this vengeance thou shalt have therefore,
That if thou wreye me, thou shalt be wood."	That if thou betray me, thou shalt go mad."
"Nay, Crist forbede it, for his hooly blood!"	"Nay, Christ forbid it, for his holy blood!"
Quod tho this sely man, "I nam no labbe,	Said then this hapless man, "I am no blabbermouth,
Ne, though I seye, I nam nat lief to gabbe.	And, though I say it, I do not like to gab.
Sey what thou wolt, I shal it nevere telle	Say what thou will, I shall never tell it
To child ne wyf, by hym that harwed helle!"	To child nor wife, by Him that rescued souls from hell!"
"Now John," quod Nicholas, "I wol nat lye;	"Now John," said Nicholas, "I will not lie;
I have yfounde in myn astrologye,	I have found in my astrology,
As I have looked in the moone bright,	As I have looked on the bright moon,
That now a Monday next, at quarter nyght,	That now on Monday next, after midnight,
Shal falle a reyn, and that so wilde and wood	Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and raging
That half so greet was nevere Noes flood.	That Noah's flood was never half so large.
This world," he seyde, "in lasse than an hour	This world," he said, "in less than an hour
Shal al be dreynt, so hidous is the shour.	Shall all be drowned, so hideous is the shower.
Thus shal mankynde drenche, and lese hir lyf."	Thus shall mankind drown, and lose their lives."
This carpenter answerde, "Allas, my wyf!	This carpenter answered, "Alas, my wife!
And shal she drenche? Allas, myn Alisoun!"	And shall she drown? Alas, my Alisoun!"
For sorwe of this he fil almoost adoun,	For sorrow of this he almost fell down,
And seyde, "Is ther no remedie in this cas?"	And said, "Is there no remedy in this case?"
"Why, yis, for Gode," quod hende Nicholas,	"Why, yes indeed, by God," said clever Nicholas,
"If thou wolt werken after loore and reed.	"If thou will act in accordance with learning and (good) advice.
Thou mayst nat werken after thyn owene heed;	Thou mayst not act according to thine own ideas;
For thus seith Salomon, that was ful trewe:	For thus says Salomon, which was very true:
`Werk al by conseil, and thou shalt nat rewe.'	`Do all in accordance with good advice, and thou shalt not rue (it).'
And if thou werken wolt by good conseil,	And if thou will act in accordance with good advice,
I undertake, withouten mast and seyl,	I guarantee, without mast and sail,
Yet shal I saven hire and thee and me.	Yet shall I save her and thee and me.
Hastow nat herd hou saved was Noe,	Hast thou not heard how Noah was saved,
Whan that oure Lord hadde warned hym biforn	When our Lord had warned him before
That al the world with water sholde be lorn?"	That all the world should be destroyed by water?"
"Yis," quod this Carpenter, "ful yoore ago."	"Yes indeed," said this Carpenter, "very long ago."
"Hastou nat herd," quod Nicholas, "also	"Hast thou not heard," said Nicholas, "also
The sorwe of Noe with his felaweshipe,	The sorrow of Noah with his fellowship,
Er that he myghte gete his wyf to shipe?	Before he could get his wife onto the ship?
Hym hadde be levere, I dar wel undertake,	He would rather, I dare well guarantee,
At thilke tyme, than alle his wetheres blake	At that time, than have all his black sheep
That she hadde had a ship hirself allone.	That she had had a ship for herself alone.
And therfore, woostou what is best to doone?	And therefore, knowest thou what is best to do?
This asketh haste, and of an hastif thyng	This needs haste, and of a hasty thing
Men may nat preche or maken tariyng.	Men may not preach nor make tarrying.
"Anon go gete us faste into this in	"Right now go bring us quickly into this dwelling
A knedyng trogh, or ellis a kymelyn,	A kneading trough, or else a large vat,
For ech of us, but looke that they be large,	For each of us, but see that they be large,
In which we mowe swymme as in a barge,	In which we may float as in a barge,
And han therinne vitaille suffisant	And have therein sufficient victuals
But for a day -- fy on the remenant!	But for a day -- fie on the remnant!
The water shal aslake and goon away	The water shall recede and go away
Aboute pryme upon the nexte day.	About nine a.m. on the next day.
But Robyn may nat wite of this, thy knave,	But Robin, thy knave, may not know of this,
Ne eek thy mayde Gille I may nat save;	And also thy maid Gille I can not save;
Axe nat why, for though thou aske me,	Ask not why, for though thou ask me,
I wol nat tellen Goddes pryvetee.	I will not tell God's secrets.
Suffiseth thee, but if thy wittes madde,	It suffices thee, unless thy wits go mad,
To han as greet a grace as Noe hadde.	To have as great a grace as Noah had.
Thy wyf shal I wel saven, out of doute.	Thy wife shall I well save, beyond doubt.
Go now thy wey, and speed thee heer-aboute.	Go now thy way, and speed thee on this business.
"But whan thou hast, for hire and thee and me,	"But when thou hast, for her and thee and me,
Ygeten us thise knedyng tubbes thre,	Got us these three kneading tubs,
Thanne shaltow hange hem in the roof ful hye,	Then shalt thou hang them in the roof very high,
That no man of oure purveiaunce espye.	In a way that no man may espy our preparations.
And whan thou thus hast doon as I have seyd,	And when thou thus hast done as I have said,
And hast oure vitaille faire in hem yleyd,	And hast laid our victuals carefully in them,
And eek an ax to smyte the corde atwo,	And also an axe to smite the cord in two,
Whan that the water comth, that we may go	When the water comes, so that we may go
And breke an hole an heigh, upon the gable,	And break a hole on high, upon the gable,
Unto the gardyn-ward, over the stable,	Toward the garden, over the stable,
That we may frely passen forth oure way,	That we may freely pass forth on our way,
Whan that the grete shour is goon away.	When the great shower is gone away.
Thanne shaltou swymme as myrie, I undertake,	Then shalt thou float as merry, I guarantee,
As dooth the white doke after hire drake.	As does the white duck after her drake.
Thanne wol I clepe, `How, Alison! How, John!	Then will I call, `How, Alison! How, John!
Be myrie, for the flood wol passe anon.'	Be merry, for the flood will soon pass.'
And thou wolt seyn, `Hayl, maister Nicholay!	And thou will say, `Hail, master Nicholay!
Good morwe, I se thee wel, for it is day.'	Good morrow, I see thee well, for it is day.'
And thanne shul we be lordes al oure lyf	And then shall we be lords all our life
Of al the world, as Noe and his wyf.	Of all the world, like Noah and his wife.
"But of o thyng I warne thee ful right:	"But of one thing I warn thee very sternly:
Be wel avysed on that ilke nyght	Be well advised on that same night
That we ben entred into shippes bord,	On which we are entered onto shipboard,
That noon of us ne speke nat a word,	That not one of us speak a word,
Ne clepe, ne crie, but be in his preyere;	Nor call, nor cry, but be in his prayer;
For it is Goddes owene heeste deere.	For it is God's own dear command.
"Thy wyf and thou moote hange fer atwynne,	"Thy wife and thou must hang far apart,
For that bitwixe yow shal be no synne,	So that between yow shall be no sin,
Namoore in lookyng than ther shal in deede.	No more in looking than there shall be in deed.
This ordinance is seyd. Go, God thee speede!	This ordinance is said. Go, God give thee success!
Tomorwe at nyght, whan men ben alle aslepe,	Tomorrow at night, when people are all asleep,
Into oure knedyng-tubbes wol we crepe,	Into our kneading-tubs will we creep,
And sitten there, abidyng Goddes grace.	And sit there, awaiting God's grace.
Go now thy wey; I have no lenger space	Go now thy way; I have no more time
To make of this no lenger sermonyng.	To make of this any longer preaching.
Men seyn thus, `sende the wise, and sey no thyng.'	Men say thus, `send the wise, and say nothing.'
Thou art so wys, it needeth thee nat teche.	Thou art so wise, one needs not teach thee.
Go, save oure lyf, and that I the biseche."	Go, save our life, and that I beseech thee."
This sely carpenter goth forth his wey.	This hapless carpenter goes forth his way.
Ful ofte he seide "Allas and weylawey,"	Very often he said "Alas and woe is me,"
And to his wyf he tolde his pryvetee,	And to his wife he told his secret,
And she was war, and knew it bet than he,	And she was aware, and knew it better than he,
What al this queynte cast was for to seye.	What all this ingenious scheme meant.
But nathelees she ferde as she wolde deye,	But nonetheless she acted as if she would die,
And seyde, "Allas! go forth thy wey anon,	And said, "Alas! go forth thy way quickly,
Help us to scape, or we been dede echon!	Help us to escape, or we are dead each one of us!
I am thy trewe, verray wedded wyf;	I am thy faithful, truly wedded wife;
Go, deere spouse, and help to save oure lyf."	Go, dear spouse, and help to save our lives."
Lo, which a greet thyng is affeccioun!	Lo, what a great thing is emotion!
Men may dyen of ymaginacioun,	One can die of imagination,
So depe may impressioun be take.	So deeply may a mental image be taken.
This sely carpenter bigynneth quake;	This hapless carpenter begins to tremble;
Hym thynketh verraily that he may see	He thinks truly that he can see
Noees flood come walwynge as the see	Noah's flood come surging like the sea
To drenchen Alisoun, his hony deere.	To drown Alisoun, his honey dear.
He wepeth, weyleth, maketh sory cheere;	He weeps, wails, looks wretched;
He siketh with ful many a sory swogh;	He sighs with very many a sorry groan;
He gooth and geteth hym a knedyng trogh,	He goes and gets him a kneading trough,
And after that a tubbe and a kymelyn,	And after that a tub and a large vat,
And pryvely he sente hem to his in,	And secretly he sent them to his dwelling,
And heng hem in the roof in pryvetee.	And hanged them in the roof secretly.
His owene hand he made laddres thre,	With his own hand he made three ladders,
To clymben by the ronges and the stalkes	To climb by the rungs and the uprights
Unto the tubbes hangynge in the balkes,	Unto the tubs hanging in the beams,
And hem vitailled, bothe trogh and tubbe,	And provisioned them, both trough and tub,
With breed, and chese, and good ale in a jubbe,	With bread, and cheese, and good ale in a jug,
Suffisynge right ynogh as for a day.	Sufficing just enough for a day.
But er that he hadde maad al this array,	But before he had made all this preparation,
He sente his knave, and eek his wenche also,	He sent his servant, and also his servant girl,
Upon his nede to London for to go.	Upon his business to go to London.
And on the Monday, whan it drow to nyght,	And on the Monday, when it drew toward night,
He shette his dore withoute candel-lyght,	He shut his door without candlelight,
And dressed alle thyng as it sholde be.	And prepared everything as it should be.
And shortly, up they clomben alle thre;	And shortly, up they climbed all three;
They seten stille wel a furlong way.	They sat still a good two and one-half minutes.
"Now, Pater-noster, clom!" seyde Nicholay,	"Now, Pater-noster, quiet!" said Nicholay,
And "Clom!" quod John, and "Clom!" seyde Alisoun.	And "Quiet!" said John, and "Quiet!" said Alisoun.
This carpenter seyde his devocioun,	This carpenter said his devotion,
And stille he sit, and biddeth his preyere,	And still he sits, and says his prayer,
Awaitynge on the reyn, if he it heere.	Awaiting the rain, if he might hear it.
The dede sleep, for wery bisynesse,	The dead sleep, for weary business,
Fil on this carpenter right, as I gesse,	Fell on this carpenter right, as I guess,
Aboute corfew-tyme, or litel moore;	About curfew time, or a little more;
For travaille of his goost he groneth soore,	For suffering of his spirit he groans deeply,
And eft he routeth, for his heed myslay.	And also he snores, for his head lay wrong.
Doun of the laddre stalketh Nicholay,	Down on the ladder stalks Nicholay,
And Alisoun ful softe adoun she spedde;	And Alisoun very quietly down she sped;
Withouten wordes mo they goon to bedde,	Without more words they go to bed,
Ther as the carpenter is wont to lye.	Where the carpenter is accustomed to lie.
Ther was the revel and the melodye;	There was the revel and the sounds of festivity;
And thus lith Alison and Nicholas,	And thus lie Alison and Nicholas,
In bisynesse of myrthe and of solas,	In business of mirth and of pleasure,
Til that the belle of laudes gan to rynge,	Until the bell of the early morning service began to ring,
And freres in the chauncel gonne synge.	And friars in the chapel began to sing.
This parissh clerk, this amorous Absolon,	This parish clerk, this amorous Absolon,
That is for love alwey so wo bigon,	That is for love always so woebegone,
Upon the Monday was at Oseneye	Upon the Monday was at Oseneye
With compaignye, hym to disporte and pleye,	With company, to be merry and amuse himself,
And axed upon cas a cloisterer	And by chance asked a cloistered monk
Ful prively after John the carpenter;	Very discreetly about John the carpenter;
And he drough hym apart out of the chirche,	And he drew him apart out of the church,
And seyde, "I noot; I saugh hym heere nat wirche	And said, "I know not; I have not seen him working here
Syn Saterday; I trowe that he be went	Since Saturday; I suppose that he is gone
For tymber, ther oure abbot hath hym sent;	For timber, where our abbot has sent him;
For he is wont for tymber for to go	For he is accustomed to go for timber
And dwellen at the grange a day or two;	And dwell at the granary a day or two;
Or elles he is at his hous, certeyn.	Or else he is at his house, certainly.
Where that he be, I kan nat soothly seyn."	Where he may be, I can not truly say."
This Absolon ful joly was and light,	This Absolon very was jolly and happy,
And thoghte, "Now is tyme to wake al nyght,	And thought, "Now is time to stay awake all night,
For sikirly I saugh hym nat stirynge	For surely I saw him not stirring
Aboute his dore, syn day bigan to sprynge.	About his door, since day began to spring.
"So moot I thryve, I shal, at cokkes crowe,	"As I may prosper, I shall, at cock's crow,
Ful pryvely knokken at his wyndowe	Very quietly knock at his window
That stant ful lowe upon his boures wal.	That stands very low upon his bedroom's wall.
To Alison now wol I tellen al	To Alison now I will tell all
My love-longynge, for yet I shal nat mysse	My love-longing, for yet I shall not miss
That at the leeste wey I shal hire kisse.	That at the very least I shall her kiss.
Som maner confort shal I have, parfay.	Some sort of comfort shall I have, by my faith.
My mouth hath icched al this longe day;	My mouth has itched all this long day;
That is a signe of kissyng atte leeste.	That is a sign of kissing at the least.
Al nyght me mette eek I was at a feeste.	All night I dreamed also I was at a feast.
Therfore I wol go slepe an houre or tweye,	Therefore I will go sleep an hour or two,
And al the nyght thanne wol I wake and pleye."	And all the night then will I stay awake and play."
Whan that the firste cok hath crowe, anon	When the first cock has crowed (about midnight), at once
Up rist this joly lovere Absolon,	Up rises this elegant lover Absolon,
And hym arraieth gay, at poynt-devys.	And dresses himself handsomely, in every detail.
But first he cheweth greyn and lycorys,	But first he chews cardamom and licorice,
To smellen sweete, er he hadde kembd his heer.	To smell sweet, ere he had combed his hair.
Under his tonge a trewe-love he beer,	Under his tongue he had a true-love herb,
For therby wende he to ben gracious.	For thus he thought he would be gracious.
He rometh to the carpenteres hous,	He goes to the carpenter's house,
And stille he stant under the shot-wyndowe --	And he stands still under the casement window --
Unto his brest it raughte, it was so lowe --	Unto his breast it reached, it was so low --
And softe he cougheth with a semy soun:	And softly he coughs with a gentle sound:
"What do ye, hony-comb, sweete Alisoun,	"What do you, honey-comb, sweet Alisoun,
My faire bryd, my sweete cynamome?	My fair bird, my sweet cinnamon?
Awaketh, lemman myn, and speketh to me!	Awake, sweetheart mine, and speak to me!
Wel litel thynken ye upon my wo,	Well little you think upon my woe,
That for youre love I swete ther I go.	That for your love I sweat wherever I go.
No wonder is thogh that I swelte and swete;	No wonder is though that I swelter and sweat;
I moorne as dooth a lamb after the tete.	I mourn as does a lamb after the tit.
Ywis, lemman, I have swich love-longynge	Indeed, sweetheart, I have such love-longing
That lik a turtel trewe is my moornynge.	That like a true turtledove is my mourning.
I may nat ete na moore than a mayde."	I can eat no more than a maiden."
"Go fro the wyndow, Jakke fool," she sayde;	"Go from the window, you idiot," she said;
"As help me God, it wol nat be `com pa me.'	"So help me God, it will not be `come kiss me.'
I love another -- and elles I were to blame --	I love another -- and else I were to blame --
Wel bet than thee, by Jhesu, Absolon.	Well better than thee, by Jesus, Absolon.
Go forth thy wey, or I wol caste a ston,	Go forth thy way, or I will cast a stone,
And lat me slepe, a twenty devel wey!"	And let me sleep, in the name of twenty devils!"
"Allas," quod Absolon, "and weylawey,	"Alas," said Absolon, "and woe is me,
That trewe love was evere so yvel biset!	That true love was ever in such miserable circumstances!
Thanne kysse me, syn it may be no bet,	Then kiss me, since it can be no better,
For Jhesus love, and for the love of me."	For Jesus' love, and for the love of me."
"Wiltow thanne go thy wey therwith?" quod she.	"Wilt thou then go thy way with that?" said she.
"Ye, certes, lemman," quod this Absolon.	"Yes, certainly, sweetheart," said this Absolon.
"Thanne make thee redy," quod she, "I come anon."	"Then make thee ready," said she, "I come right now."
And unto Nicholas she seyde stille,	And unto Nicholas she said quietly,
"Now hust, and thou shalt laughen al thy fille."	"Now hush, and thou shalt laugh all thy fill."
This Absolon doun sette hym on his knees	This Absolon set himself down on his knees
And seyde, "I am a lord at alle degrees;	And said, "I am a lord in every way;
For after this I hope ther cometh moore.	For after this I hope there comes more.
Lemman, thy grace, and sweete bryd, thyn oore!"	Sweetheart, thy grace, and sweet bird, thy mercy!"
The wyndow she undoth, and that in haste.	The window she undoes, and that in haste.
"Have do," quod she, "com of, and speed the faste,	"Get done with it," said she, "come on, and hurry up,
Lest that oure neighebores thee espie."	Lest our neighbors espy thee."
This Absolon gan wype his mouth ful drie.	This Absolon wiped his mouth very dry.
Derk was the nyght as pich, or as the cole,	Dark was the night as pitch, or as the coal,
And at the wyndow out she putte hir hole,	And at the window out she put her hole,
And Absolon, hym fil no bet ne wers,	And Absolon, to him it happened no better nor worse,
But with his mouth he kiste hir naked ers	But with his mouth he kissed her naked ass
Ful savourly, er he were war of this.	With great relish, before he was aware of this.
Abak he stirte, and thoughte it was amys,	Back he jumped, and thought it was amiss,
For wel he wiste a womman hath no berd.	For well he knew a woman has no beard.
He felte a thyng al rough and long yherd,	He felt a thing all rough and long haired,
And seyde, "Fy! allas! what have I do?"	And said, "Fie! alas! what have I done?"
"Tehee!" quod she, and clapte the wyndow to,	"Tehee!" said she, and clapped the window to,
And Absolon gooth forth a sory pas.	And Absolon goes forth walking sadly.
"A berd! A berd!" quod hende Nicholas,	"A beard! A beard!" said clever Nicholas,
"By Goddes corpus, this goth faire and weel."	"By God's body, this goes fair and well."
This sely Absolon herde every deel,	This hapless Absolon heard every bit,
And on his lippe he gan for anger byte,	And on his lip he began for anger to bite,
And to hymself he seyde, "I shal thee quyte."	And to himself he said, "I shall pay thee back."
Who rubbeth now, who froteth now his lippes	Who rubs now, who now scrubs his lips
With dust, with sond, with straw, with clooth, with chippes,	With dust, with sand, with straw, with cloth, with chips,
But Absolon, that seith ful ofte, "Allas!"	But Absolon, who says very often, "Alas!"
"My soule bitake I unto Sathanas,	"My soul I entrust to Satan,
But me were levere than al this toun," quod he,	If I would not rather than (have) all this town," said he,
"Of this despit awroken for to be.	"Be avenged for this insult.
Allas," quod he, "allas, I ne hadde ybleynt!"	Alas," said he, "alas, I did not turn away!"
His hoote love was coold and al yqueynt;	His hot love was cold and all extinguished;
For fro that tyme that he hadde kist hir ers,	For from that time that he had kissed her ass,
Of paramours he sette nat a kers,	Love-making he thought not worth not a watercress,
For he was heeled of his maladie.	For he was healed of his malady.
Ful ofte paramours he gan deffie,	Very often he did renounce love-making,
And weep as dooth a child that is ybete.	And wept as does a child that is beaten.
A softe paas he wente over the strete	At a slow pace he went down the street
Until a smyth men cleped daun Gerveys,	To a smith men called dan Gerveys,
That in his forge smythed plough harneys;	Who in his forge made plowing equipment;
He sharpeth shaar and kultour bisily.	He sharpens ploughshares and plough blades busily.
This Absolon knokketh al esily,	This Absolon knocked all gently,
And seyde, "Undo, Gerveys, and that anon."	And said, "Open up, Gerveys, and that right now."
"What, who artow?" "It am I, Absolon."	"What, who art thou?" "It am I, Absolon."
"What, Absolon! for Cristes sweete tree,	"What, Absolon! for Christ's sweet cross,
Why rise ye so rathe? Ey, benedicitee!	Why rise you so early? Ay, bless me!
What eyleth yow? Som gay gerl, God it woot,	What ails yow? Some pretty girl, God knows it,
Hath broght yow thus upon the viritoot.	Hath brought you to be running around like this.
By Seinte Note, ye woot wel what I mene."	By Saint Note, you know well what I mean."
This Absolon ne roghte nat a bene	This Absolon cared not a bean
Of al his pley; no word agayn he yaf;	For all his joking; no word he gave in reply;
He hadde moore tow on his distaf	He had more business on hand
Than Gerveys knew, and seyde, "Freend so deere,	Than Gerveys knew, and said, "Friend so dear,
That hoote kultour in the chymenee heere,	That hot plough blade in the hearth here,
As lene it me; I have therwith to doone,	Lend it to me; I have something to do with it,
And I wol brynge it thee agayn ful soone."	And I will bring it back to thee very soon."
Gerveys answerde, "Certes, were it gold,	Gerveys answered, "Certainly, were it gold,
Or in a poke nobles alle untold,	Or in a sack countless silver coins,
Thou sholdest have, as I am trewe smyth.	Thou sholdest have it, as I am true smith.
Ey, Cristes foo! What wol ye do therwith?"	Ay, Christ's foe! What will you do with it?"
"Therof," quod Absolon, "be as be may.	"Concerning that," said Absolon, "be as be may.
I shal wel telle it thee to-morwe day" --	I shall well tell it to thee to-morrow" --
And caughte the kultour by the colde stele.	And caught the plough blade by the cold handle.
Ful softe out at the dore he gan to stele,	Very softly out at the door he began to steal,
And wente unto the carpenteris wal.	And went unto the carpenter's wall.
He cogheth first, and knokketh therwithal	He coughs first, and knocks then
Upon the wyndowe, right as he dide er.	Upon the window, just as he did before.
This Alison answerde, "Who is ther	This Alison answered, "Who is there
That knokketh so? I warante it a theef."	That knocks so? I swear it is a thief."
"Why, nay," quod he, "God woot, my sweete leef,	"Why, nay," said he, "God knows, my sweet beloved,
I am thyn Absolon, my deerelyng.	I am thy Absolon, my darling.
Of gold," quod he, "I have thee broght a ryng.	Of gold," said he, "I have brought thee a ring.
My mooder yaf it me, so God me save;	My mother gave it to me, as God may save me;
Ful fyn it is, and therto wel ygrave.	Very fine it is, and also nicely engraved.
This wol I yeve thee, if thou me kisse."	This will I give thee, if thou kiss me."
This Nicholas was risen for to pisse,	This Nicholas was risen to piss,
And thoughte he wolde amenden al the jape;	And thought he would make the joke even better;
He sholde kisse his ers er that he scape.	He should kiss his ass before he escapes.
And up the wyndowe dide he hastily,	And he opened up the window hastily,
And out his ers he putteth pryvely	And he puts out his ass stealthily
Over the buttok, to the haunche-bon;	Over the buttock, to the thigh;
And therwith spak this clerk, this Absolon,	And then spoke this clerk, this Absolon,
"Spek, sweete bryd, I noot nat where thou art."	"Speak, sweet bird, I know not where thou art."
This Nicholas anon leet fle a fart	This Nicholas immediately let fly a fart
As greet as it had been a thonder-dent,	As great as if it had been a thunder-bolt,
That with the strook he was almoost yblent;	So that with the stroke he was almost blinded;
And he was redy with his iren hoot,	And he was ready with his hot iron,
And Nicholas amydde the ers he smoot.	And he smote Nicholas in the middle of the ass.
Of gooth the skyn an hande-brede aboute,	Off goes the skin a hand's breadth about,
The hoote kultour brende so his toute,	The hot plough blade so burned his rump
And for the smert he wende for to dye.	And for the pain he thought he would die.
As he were wood, for wo he gan to crye,	As if he were crazy, for woe he began to cry,
"Help! Water! Water! Help, for Goddes herte!"	"Help! Water! Water! Help, for God's heart!"
This carpenter out of his slomber sterte,	This carpenter woke suddenly out of his slumber,
And herde oon crien "water!" as he were wood,	And heard someone cry "water!" as if he were crazy,
And thoughte, "Allas, now comth Nowelis flood!"	And thought, "Alas, now comes Nowell's flood!"
He sit hym up withouten wordes mo,	He sits up without more words,
And with his ax he smoot the corde atwo,	And with his ax he smote the cord in two,
And doun gooth al; he foond neither to selle,	And down goes all; he found nothing to sell (wasted no time),
Ne breed ne ale, til he cam to the celle	Neither bread nor ale, until he came to the pavement
Upon the floor, and ther aswowne he lay.	Upon the floor, and there he lay in a swoon.
Up stirte hire Alison and Nicholay,	Up started Alison and Nicholay,
And criden "Out" and "Harrow" in the strete.	And cried "Out" and "Help" in the street.
The neighebores, bothe smale and grete,	The neighbors, both low-ranking and high,
In ronnen for to gauren on this man,	Run in to gawk at this man,
That yet aswowne lay, bothe pale and wan,	Who yet lay in a swoon, both pale and wan,
For with the fal he brosten hadde his arm.	For with the fall he had broken his arm.
But stonde he moste unto his owene harm;	But he had to stand up for himself, though it went badly;
For whan he spak, he was anon bore doun	For when he spoke, he was immediately put down
With hende Nicholas and Alisoun.	By clever Nicholas and Alisoun.
They tolden every man that he was wood;	They told every one that he was crazy;
He was agast so of Nowelis flood	He was so afraid of Nowell's flood
Thurgh fantasie that of his vanytee	Because of his imagination that in his foolishness
He hadde yboght hym knedyng tubbes thre,	He had bought himself three kneading tubs,
And hadde hem hanged in the roof above;	And had hanged them in the roof above;
And that he preyed hem, for Goddes love,	And that he begged them, for God's love,
To sitten in the roof, par compaignye.	To sit in the roof, to keep him company.
The folk gan laughen at his fantasye;	The folk did laugh at his foolishness;
Into the roof they kiken and they cape,	Into the roof they stare and they gape,
And turned al his harm unto a jape.	And turned all his harm into a joke.
For what so that this carpenter answerde,	For whatever this carpenter answered,
It was for noght; no man his reson herde.	It was for naught; no one listened to his explanation,
With othes grete he was so sworn adoun	With oaths great he was so sworn down
That he was holde wood in al the toun;	That he was considered crazy in all the town;
For every clerk anonright heeld with oother.	For every clerk immediately agreed with the other.
They seyde, "The man is wood, my leeve brother";	They said, "The man is crazy, my dear brother";
And every wight gan laughen at this stryf.	And every person did laugh at this strife.
Thus swyved was this carpenteris wyf,	Thus screwed was this carpenter's wife,
For al his kepyng and his jalousye,	In spite of all his guarding and his jealousy,
And Absolon hath kist hir nether ye,	And Absolon has kissed her lower eye,
And Nicholas is scalded in the towte.	And Nicholas is scalded in the rump.
This tale is doon, and God save al the rowte!	This tale is done, and God save all this company!
Heere endeth the Millere his Tale.	Here ends the Miller's Tale.
"Wel seyd, by corpus dominus," quod oure Hoost,	"Well said, by the body of our Lord," said our Host,
"Now longe moote thou saille by the cost,	"Now long may thou sail by the coast,
Sire gentil maister, gentil maryneer!	Sir gentle master, gentle mariner!
God yeve the monk a thousand last quade yeer!	God give the monk a thousand cartloads of bad years!
A ha! Felawes, beth ware of swich a jape!	A ha! Fellows, beware of such a trick!
The monk putte in the mannes hood an ape,	The monk made a monkey of the man,
And in his wyves eek, by Seint Austyn!	And of his wife as well, by Saint Augustine!
Draweth no monkes moore unto youre in.	Invite no more monks into your dwelling.
"But now passe over, and lat us seke aboute,	"But now pass over that, and let us look around to see
Who shal now telle first of al this route	Who shall now, first of all this company, tell
Another tale;" and with that word he sayde,	Another tale;" and with that word he said,
As curteisly as it had been a mayde,	As courteously as if he had been a maiden,
"My lady Prioresse, by youre leve,	"My Lady Prioress, by your leave,
So that I wiste I sholde yow nat greve,	If I knew I should not grieve you,
I wolde demen that ye tellen sholde	I would judge that you should tell
A tale next, if so were that ye wolde.	A tale next, if it so were that you would.
Now wol ye vouche sauf, my lady deere?"	Now will you grant this, my lady dear?"
"Gladly," quod she, and seyde as ye shal heere.	"Gladly," said she, and said as you shall hear.
Heere folweth the Prologe of the Persouns Tale.	Here follows the Prologue of the Parson's Tale.
By that the Maunciple hadde his tale al ended,	By the time that the Manciple had his tale all ended,
The sonne fro the south lyne was descended	The sun from the meridian was descended
So lowe that he nas nat, to my sighte,	So low that he was not, to my sight,
Degrees nyne and twenty as in highte.	More than nine and twenty degrees in altitude.
Foure of the clokke it was tho, as I gesse,	Four of the clock it was then, as I suppose,
For ellevene foot, or litel moore or lesse,	For eleven feet, or little more or less,
My shadwe was at thilke tyme, as there	My shadow was there at that same time,
Of swiche feet as my lengthe parted were	Of such feet as if my height were divided
In sixe feet equal of proporcioun.	Into six feet equal in size.
Therwith the moones exaltacioun --	Therewith the moon's exaltation --
I meene Libra -- alwey gan ascende	I mean Libra -- steadily ascended
As we were entryng at a thropes ende;	As we were entering at edge of a village;
For which oure Hoost, as he was wont to gye,	For which our Host, since he was accustomed to guide,
As in this caas, oure joly compaignye,	On this occasion, our jolly company,
Seyde in this wise: "Lordynges everichoon,	Said in this manner: "Gentlemen, every one,
Now lakketh us no tales mo than oon.	Now we lack no tales more than one.
Fulfilled is my sentence and my decree;	Fulfilled is my plan and my decree;
I trowe that we han herd of ech degree;	I believe that we have heard from each social class;
Almoost fulfild is al myn ordinaunce.	Almost fulfilled is all my governance.
I pray to God, so yeve hym right good chaunce,	I pray to God, give right good luck to him,
That telleth this tale to us lustily.	Who tells this tale to us pleasingly.
"Sire preest," quod he, "artow a vicary?	"Sire priest," said he, "art thou a vicar?
Or arte a person? Sey sooth, by thy fey!	Or art thou a parson? Tell the truth, by thy faith!
Be what thou be, ne breke thou nat oure pley;	Be whatever thou may be, break thou not our rules;
For every man, save thou, hath toold his tale.	For every man, save thou, has told his tale.
Unbokele and shewe us what is in thy male;	Unbuckle and show us what is in thy bag;
For trewely, me thynketh by thy cheere	For truly, it seems to me from your appearance
Thou sholdest knytte up wel a greet mateere.	Thou shouldest well conclude a long discourse.
Telle us a fable anon, for cokkes bones!"	Tell us a fictional tale right now, for cock's bones!"
This Persoun answerde, al atones,	This Parson answered, immediately,
"Thou getest fable noon ytoold for me,	"Thou gettest no fiction told by me,
For Paul, that writeth unto Thymothee,	For Paul, who writes unto Timothy,
Repreveth hem that weyven soothfastnesse	Reproves them that abandon truthfulness
And tellen fables and swich wrecchednesse.	And tell fictional tales and such wretched things.
Why sholde I sowen draf out of my fest,	Why should I sow chaff out of my fist,
Whan I may sowen whete, if that me lest?	When I can sow wheat, if I so wish?
For which I seye, if that yow list to heere	For which I say, if you want to hear
Moralitee and vertuous mateere,	Morality and virtuous subject matter,
And thanne that ye wol yeve me audience,	And providing that you will give me your attention,
I wol ful fayn, at Cristes reverence,	I will very gladly, to Christ's reverence,
Do yow plesaunce leefful, as I kan.	Provide you with permissible pleasure, insofar as I can.
But trusteth wel, I am a Southren man;	But trust well, I am a Southern man;
I kan nat geeste `rum, ram, ruf,' by lettre,	I can not recite `rum, ram, ruf,' letter by letter,
Ne, God woot, rym holde I but litel bettre;	And, God knows, rime I consider but little better;
And therfore, if yow list -- I wol nat glose --	And therefore, if you wish -- I will not deceive you --
I wol yow telle a myrie tale in prose	I will yow tell a merry tale in prose
To knytte up al this feeste and make an ende.	To conclude all this festivity and make an end.
And Jhesu, for his grace, wit me sende	And Jesus, for his grace, send me wit
To shewe yow the wey, in this viage,	To show you the way, in this journey,
Of thilke parfit glorious pilgrymage	Of that same perfect glorious pilgrimage
That highte Jerusalem celestial.	That is called Jerusalem celestial.
And if ye vouche sauf, anon I shal	And if you agree, I shall right now
Bigynne upon my tale, for which I preye	Begin my tale, for which I pray you
Telle youre avys; I kan no bettre seye.	To tell your decision; I can say nothing better.
"But nathelees, this meditacioun	"But nonetheless, this meditation
I putte it ay under correccioun	I put it ever subject to correction
Of clerkes, for I am nat textueel;	By clerks, for I am not learned in texts;
I take but the sentence, trusteth weel.	I take from them only the meaning, trust well.
Therfore I make protestacioun	Therefore I make this declaration
That I wol stonde to correccioun."	That I will be subject to correction."
Upon this word we han assented soone,	Upon this word we have quickly assented,
For, as it seemed, it was for to doone --	For, as it seemed, it was the best to do --
To enden in som vertuous sentence,	To end in some virtuous subject matter,
And for to yeve hym space and audience,	And to give him time and attention,
And bade oure Hoost he sholde to hym seye	And told our Host he should to him say
That alle we to telle his tale hym preye.	That we all pray him to tell his tale.
Oure Hoost hadde the wordes for us alle;	Our Host had the words for us all;
"Sire preest," quod he, "now faire yow bifalle!	"Sire priest," said he, "now may good fortune come to you!
Telleth," quod he, "youre meditacioun.	Tell," said he, "your meditation.
But hasteth yow; the sonne wole adoun;	But make haste; the sun is about to go down;
Beth fructuous, and that in litel space,	Be fruitful, and that in little time,
And to do wel God sende yow his grace!	And to do well God send you his grace!
Sey what yow list, and we wol gladly heere."	Say what you wish, and we will gladly hear."
And with that word he seyde in this manere.	And with that word he said in this manner.
Explicit prohemium.	The Prologue ends.
The wordes of the Hoost to the Phisicien and Pardoner.	The words of the host to the physician and pardoner.
Oure Hooste gan to swere as he were wood;	Our Host began to swear as if he was crazy;
"Harrow!" quod he, "by nayles and by blood!	"Alas!" said he, "by (Christ's) nails and by (His) blood!
This was a fals cherl and a fals justise.	This was a false churl and a false judge.
As shameful deeth as herte may devyse	As shameful a death as heart can devise
Come to thise juges and hire advocatz!	Come to these judges and their advocates!
Algate this sely mayde is slayn, allas!	At any rate, this innocent maid is slain, alas!
Allas, to deere boughte she beautee!	Alas, too dearly she paid for her beauty!
Wherfore I seye al day that men may see	Therefore I say that every day men may see
That yiftes of Fortune and of Nature	That gifts of Fortune and of Nature
Been cause of deeth to many a creature.	Are cause of death to many a creature.
Hire beautee was hire deth, I dar wel sayn.	Her beauty was her death, I dare well say.
Allas, so pitously as she was slayn!	Alas, so pitifully as she was slain!
Of bothe yiftes that I speke of now	Of both gifts that I speak of now
Men han ful ofte moore for harm than prow.	Men have very often more harm than benefit.
But trewely, myn owene maister deere,	But truly, mine own master dear,
This is a pitous tale for to heere.	This is a pitiful tale to hear.
But nathelees, passe over; is no fors.	But nonetheless, pass over; is does not matter.
I pray to God so save thy gentil cors,	I pray to God so save thy gentle body,
And eek thyne urynals and thy jurdones,	And also thy vessels for analyzing urine and thy flasks,
Thyn ypocras, and eek thy galiones,	Thine ipocras, and also thy galiones (medicines),
And every boyste ful of thy letuarie;	And every container full of thy electuaries;
God blesse hem, and oure lady Seinte Marie!	God bless them, and our lady Saint Mary!
So moot I theen, thou art a propre man,	As I may prosper, thou art a proper man,
And lyk a prelat, by Seint Ronyan!	And like a prelate, by Saint Ronyan!
Seyde I nat wel? I kan nat speke in terme;	Said I not well? I can not speak in technical terms;
But wel I woot thou doost myn herte to erme,	But well I know thou makes mine heart to grieve so,
That I almoost have caught a cardynacle.	That I almost have caught a palpitation of the heart.
By corpus bones! but I have triacle,	By corpus' bones! unless I have medicine,
Or elles a draughte of moyste and corny ale,	Or else a draught of fresh and strong ale,
Or but I heere anon a myrie tale,	Or unless I hear right now a merry tale,
Myn herte is lost for pitee of this mayde.	My heart is lost for pity of this maid.
Thou beel amy, thou Pardoner," he sayde,	Thou fair friend (rascal), thou Pardoner," he said,
"Telle us som myrthe or japes right anon."	"Tell us some mirth or comic tales right away."
"It shal be doon," quod he, "by Seint Ronyon!	"It shall be done," said he, "by Saint Ronyon!
But first," quod he, "heere at this alestake	But first," said he, "here at this ale stake (tavern sign)
I wol bothe drynke and eten of a cake."	I will both drink and eat of a cake."
But right anon thise gentils gonne to crye,	But right away these gentlefolk began to cry,
"Nay, lat hym telle us of no ribaudye!	"Nay, let him tell us of no ribaldry!
Telle us som moral thyng, that we may leere	Tell us some moral thing, that we may learn
Som wit, and thanne wol we gladly heere."	Some useful knowledge, and then will we gladly hear."
"I graunte, ywis," quod he, "but I moot thynke	"I agree, indeed," said he, "but I must think
Upon som honest thyng while that I drynke."	About some respectable thing while I drink."
Heere folweth the Prologe of the Pardoners Tale.	Here follows the Prologue of the Pardoner's Tale.
"Lordynges," quod he, "in chirches whan I preche,	"Gentlemen," he said, "in churches when I preach,
I peyne me to han an hauteyn speche,	I take pains to have a loud voice,
And rynge it out as round as gooth a belle,	And ring it out as round as goes a belle,
For I kan al by rote that I telle.	For I know all by rote that I tell.
My theme is alwey oon, and evere was --	My theme is always the same, and ever was --
Radix malorum est Cupiditas.	'Greed is the root of all evil.'
"First I pronounce whennes that I come,	"First I pronounce from whence I come,
And thanne my bulles shewe I, alle and some.	And then my papal bulls I show, each and every one.
Oure lige lordes seel on my patente,	Our liege lord's seal on my letter of authorization,
That shewe I first, my body to warente,	I show that first, to protect my body,
That no man be so boold, ne preest ne clerk,	So that no man be so bold, neither priest nor clerk,
Me to destourbe of Cristes hooly werk.	To hinder me from (doing) Christ's holy work.
And after that thanne telle I forth my tales;	And after that then I tell forth my tales;
Bulles of popes and of cardynales,	Indulgences of popes and of cardinals,
Of patriarkes and bishopes I shewe,	Of patriarchs and bishops I show,
And in Latyn I speke a wordes fewe,	And in Latin I speak a few words,
To saffron with my predicacioun,	With which to add spice to my preaching,
And for to stire hem to devocioun.	And to stir them to devotion.
Thanne shewe I forth my longe cristal stones,	Then I show forth my long crystal stones,
Ycrammed ful of cloutes and of bones --	Crammed full of rags and of bones --
Relikes been they, as wenen they echoon.	Relics they are, as suppose they each one.
Thanne have I in latoun a sholder-boon	Then I have mounted in latten (brass-like alloy) a shoulder-bone
Which that was of an hooly Jewes sheep.	Which was of a holy Jew's sheep.
`Goode men,' I seye, `taak of my wordes keep;	`Good men,' I say, `take heed of my words;
If that this boon be wasshe in any welle,	If this bone be washed in any well,
If cow, or calf, or sheep, or oxe swelle	If cow, or calf, or sheep, or ox swell
That any worm hath ete, or worm ystonge,	That any worm has eaten, or worm stung,
Taak water of that welle and wassh his tonge,	Take water of that well and wash its tongue,
And it is hool anon; and forthermoore,	And it is whole right away; and furthermore,
Of pokkes and of scabbe, and every soore	Of pocks and of scab, and every sore
Shal every sheep be hool that of this welle	Every sheep shall be whole that of this well
Drynketh a draughte. Taak kep eek what I telle:	Drinks a draft. Take heed also what I say:
If that the good-man that the beestes oweth	If the householder who owns the beasts
Wol every wyke, er that the cok hym croweth,	Will every week, before the cock crows,
Fastynge, drynken of this welle a draughte,	Fasting, drink of this well a draft,
As thilke hooly Jew oure eldres taughte,	As that same holy Jew taught our elders,
His beestes and his stoor shal multiplie.	His beasts and his possessions shall multiply.
`And, sires, also it heeleth jalousie;	`And, sirs, it also heals jealousy;
For though a man be falle in jalous rage,	For though a man be fallen in jealous rage,
Lat maken with this water his potage,	Have his potage made with this water,
And nevere shal he moore his wyf mystriste,	And he shall never more mistrust his wife,
Though he the soothe of hir defaute wiste,	Though he knew the truth of her misdeed,
Al had she taken prestes two or thre.	Although she had taken two or three priests.
`Heere is a miteyn eek, that ye may se.	`Here is a mitten also, that you may see.
He that his hand wol putte in this mitayn,	He that will put his hand in this mitten,
He shal have multipliyng of his grayn,	He shall have multiplying of his grain,
Whan he hath sowen, be it whete or otes,	When he has sown, be it wheat or oats,
So that he offre pens, or elles grotes.	Providing that he offer pennies, or else fourpences.
`Goode men and wommen, o thyng warne I yow:	`Good men and women, one thing I warn you:
If any wight be in this chirche now	If any person be in this church now
That hath doon synne horrible, that he	Who has done such horrible sin, that he
Dar nat, for shame, of it yshryven be,	Dare not, for shame, be confessed of it,
Or any womman, be she yong or old,	Or any woman, be she young or old,
That hath ymaked hir housbonde cokewold,	Who has made her husband cuckold,
Swich folk shal have no power ne no grace	Such folk shall have no power nor no grace
To offren to my relikes in this place.	To offer to my relics in this place.
And whoso fyndeth hym out of swich blame,	And whoever finds himself out of such blame,
He wol come up and offre a Goddes name,	He will come up and offer in God's name,
And I assoille him by the auctoritee	And I will absolve him by the authority
Which that by bulle ygraunted was to me.'	Which by papal bull was granted to me.'
"By this gaude have I wonne, yeer by yeer,	"By this trick have I won, year after year,
An hundred mark sith I was pardoner.	An hundred marks since I was pardoner.
I stonde lyk a clerk in my pulpet,	I stand like a clerk in my pulpit,
And whan the lewed peple is doun yset,	And when the ignorant people are set down,
I preche so as ye han herd bifoore	I preach as you have heard before
And telle an hundred false japes moore.	And tell a hundred more false tales.
Thanne peyne I me to strecche forth the nekke,	Then I take pains to stretch forth the neck,
And est and west upon the peple I bekke,	And east and west upon the people I nod,
As dooth a dowve sittynge on a berne.	As does a dove sitting on a barn.
Myne handes and my tonge goon so yerne	My hands and my tongue go so quickly
That it is joye to se my bisynesse.	That it is joy to see my business.
Of avarice and of swich cursednesse	Of avarice and of such cursedness
Is al my prechyng, for to make hem free	Is all my preaching, to make them generous
To yeven hir pens, and namely unto me.	To give their pennies, and namely unto me.
For myn entente is nat but for to wynne,	For my intention is only to make a profit,
And nothyng for correccioun of synne.	And not at all for correction of sin.
I rekke nevere, whan that they been beryed,	I care not a bit, when they are buried,
Though that hir soules goon a-blakeberyed!	Though their souls go picking blackberries!
For certes, many a predicacioun	For certainly, many a sermon
Comth ofte tyme of yvel entencioun;	Comes often times from an evil intention;
Som for plesance of folk and flaterye,	Some for pleasure of folk and flattery,
To been avaunced by ypocrisye,	To be advanced by hypocrisy,
And som for veyne glorie, and som for hate.	And some for vain glory, and some for hate.
For whan I dar noon oother weyes debate,	For when I dare debate no other ways,
Thanne wol I stynge hym with my tonge smerte	Then I will sting him with my sharp tongue
In prechyng, so that he shal nat asterte	In preaching, so that he shall not escape
To been defamed falsly, if that he	To be defamed falsely, if he
Hath trespased to my bretheren or to me.	Has trespassed to my brethren or to me.
For though I telle noght his propre name,	For though I tell not his proper name,
Men shal wel knowe that it is the same,	Men shall well know that it is the same,
By signes, and by othere circumstances.	By signs, and by other details.
Thus quyte I folk that doon us displesances;	Thus I repay folk who make trouble for us pardoners;
Thus spitte I out my venym under hewe	Thus I spit out my venom under hue
Of hoolynesse, to semen hooly and trewe.	Of holinesses, to seem holy and true.
"But shortly myn entente I wol devyse:	"But shortly my intention I will tell:
I preche of no thyng but for coveityse.	I preach of nothing but for greed.
Therfore my theme is yet, and evere was,	Therefore my theme is yet, and ever was,
Radix malorum est Cupiditas.	`Greed is the root of all evil.'
Thus kan I preche agayn that same vice	Thus I can preach against that same vice
Which that I use, and that is avarice.	Which I use, and that is avarice.
But though myself be gilty in that synne,	But though myself be guilty of that sin,
Yet kan I maken oother folk to twynne	Yet I can make other folk to turn away
From avarice and soore to repente.	From avarice and bitterly to repent.
But that is nat my principal entente;	But that is not my principal intention;
I preche nothyng but for coveitise.	I preach nothing but for greed.
Of this mateere it oghte ynogh suffise.	Concerning this matter this ought to be enough.
"Thanne telle I hem ensamples many oon	"Then I tell them illustrative tales many a one
Of olde stories longe tyme agoon.	Of old stories from long time ago.
For lewed peple loven tales olde;	For ignorant people love old tales;
Swiche thynges kan they wel reporte and holde.	Such things they can well repeat and hold in memory.
What, trowe ye, that whiles I may preche,	What, do you suppose, that while I can preach,
And wynne gold and silver for I teche,	And win gold and silver because I teach,
That I wol lyve in poverte wilfully?	That I will live in poverty voluntarily?
Nay, nay, I thoghte it nevere, trewely!	Nay, nay, I never thought it, truly!
For I wol preche and begge in sondry landes;	For I will preach and beg in various lands;
I wol nat do no labour with myne handes,	I will not do any labor with my hands,
Ne make baskettes and lyve therby,	Nor make baskets and live thereby,
By cause I wol nat beggen ydelly.	Because I will not beg idly.
I wol noon of the apostles countrefete;	I will imitate none of the apostles;
I wol have moneie, wolle, chese, and whete,	I will have money, wool, cheese, and wheat,
Al were it yeven of the povereste page,	Although it were given by the poorest servant boy,
Or of the povereste wydwe in a village,	Or by the poorest widow in a village,
Al sholde hir children sterve for famyne.	Even though her children should die of hunger.
Nay, I wol drynke licour of the vyne	Nay, I will drink liquor of the vine
And have a joly wenche in every toun.	And have a pretty wench in every town.
But herkneth, lordynges, in conclusioun:	But listen, gentlemen, in conclusion:
Youre likyng is that I shal telle a tale.	Your desire is that I shall tell a tale.
Now have I dronke a draughte of corny ale,	Now I have drunk a draft of strong ale,
By God, I hope I shal yow telle a thyng	By God, I hope I shall tell you a thing
That shal by reson been at youre likyng.	That shall, for good reason, be to your liking.
For though myself be a ful vicious man,	For though myself be a very vicious man,
A moral tale yet I yow telle kan,	Yet I can tell you a moral tale,
Which I am wont to preche for to wynne.	Which I am accustomed to preach in order to profit.
Now hoold youre pees! My tale I wol bigynne."	Now hold your peace! My tale I will begin."
Heere bigynneth the Pardoners Tale.	Here begins the Pardoner's Tale.
In Flaundres whilom was a compaignye	In Flanders once was a company
Of yonge folk that haunteden folye,	Of young folk who practiced folly,
As riot, hasard, stywes, and tavernes,	Such as debauchery, gambling, brothels, and taverns,
Where as with harpes, lutes, and gyternes,	Where with harps, lutes, and guitars,
They daunce and pleyen at dees bothe day and nyght,	They dance and play at dice both day and night,
And eten also and drynken over hir myght,	And also eat and drink beyond their capacity,
Thurgh which they doon the devel sacrifise	Through which they do the devil sacrifice
Withinne that develes temple in cursed wise	Within that devil's temple in cursed manner
By superfluytee abhomynable.	By abominable excess.
Hir othes been so grete and so dampnable	Their oaths are so great and so damnable
That it is grisly for to heere hem swere.	That it is grisly to hear them swear.
Oure blissed Lordes body they totere --	Our blessed Lord's body they tore in pieces --
Hem thoughte that Jewes rente hym noght ynough --	They thought that the Jews did not tear him enough --
And ech of hem at otheres synne lough.	And each of them laughed at the other's sin.
And right anon thanne comen tombesteres	And right away then come dancing girls
Fetys and smale, and yonge frutesteres,	Elegantly shaped and slim, and girls selling fruits,
Syngeres with harpes, baudes, wafereres,	Singers with harps, bawds, girls selling wafers,
Whiche been the verray develes officeres	Which are the very devil's officers
To kyndle and blowe the fyr of lecherye,	To kindle and blow the fire of lechery,
That is annexed unto glotonye.	That is joined unto gluttony.
The hooly writ take I to my witnesse	The Bible I take as my witness
That luxurie is in wyn and dronkenesse.	That lechery is in wine and drunkenness.
Lo, how that dronken Looth, unkyndely,	Lo, how that drunken Lot, unnaturally,
Lay by his doghtres two, unwityngly;	Lay by his two daughters, unwittingly;
So dronke he was, he nyste what he wroghte.	So drunk he was, he knew not what he did.
Herodes, whoso wel the stories soghte,	Herod, whoever should seek well the histories (would learn),
Whan he of wyn was repleet at his feeste,	When he was filled with wine at his feast,
Right at his owene table he yaf his heeste	Right at his own table he gave his command
To sleen the Baptist John, ful giltelees.	To slay John the Baptist, full guiltless.
Senec seith a good word doutelees;	Seneca says a good word, doubtless;
He seith he kan no difference fynde	He says he can find no difference
Bitwix a man that is out of his mynde	Between a man that is out of his mind
And a man which that is dronkelewe,	And a man that is drunk,
But that woodnesse, yfallen in a shrewe,	Except that madness, fallen in an evil person,
Persevereth lenger than doth dronkenesse.	Lasts longer than does drunkenness.
O glotonye, ful of cursednesse!	O gluttony, full of cursedness!
O cause first of oure confusioun!	O first cause of our ruin!
O original of oure dampnacioun,	O origin of our damnation,
Til Crist hadde boght us with his blood agayn!	Until Christ had bought us with his blood again!
Lo, how deere, shortly for to sayn,	Lo, how dearly, shortly to say,
Aboght was thilke cursed vileynye!	Was bought that same cursed villainy!
Corrupt was al this world for glotonye.	Corrupt was all this world for gluttony.
Adam oure fader, and his wyf also,	Adam our fader, and his wife also,
Fro Paradys to labour and to wo	From Paradise to labor and to woe
Were dryven for that vice, it is no drede.	Were driven for that vice, there is no doubt.
For whil that Adam fasted, as I rede,	For while Adam fasted, as I read,
He was in Paradys; and whan that he	He was in Paradise; and when he
Eet of the fruyt deffended on the tree,	Ate of the forbidden fruit on the tree,
Anon he was out cast to wo and peyne.	Immediately he was cast out to woe and pain.
O glotonye, on thee wel oghte us pleyne!	O gluttony, on thee well we ought to complain!
O, wiste a man how manye maladyes	O, if a man knew how many evils
Folwen of excesse and of glotonyes,	Follow of excess and of gluttony,
He wolde been the moore mesurable	He would be the more moderate
Of his diete, sittynge at his table.	Of his diet, sitting at his table.
Allas, the shorte throte, the tendre mouth,	Alas, the short throat, the tender mouth,
Maketh that est and west and north and south,	Makes that east and west and north and south,
In erthe, in eir, in water, men to swynke	In earth, in air, in water, men work
To gete a glotoun deyntee mete and drynke!	To get a glutton dainty food and drink!
Of this matiere, O Paul, wel kanstow trete:	Of this matter, O Paul, well can thou treat
"Mete unto wombe, and wombe eek unto mete,	"Food unto belly, and belly also unto food,
Shal God destroyen bothe," as Paulus seith.	God shall destroy both," as Paul says.
Allas, a foul thyng is it, by my feith,	Alas, a foul thing it is, by my faith,
To seye this word, and fouler is the dede,	To say this word, and fouler is the deed,
Whan man so drynketh of the white and rede	When man so drinks of the white and red
That of his throte he maketh his pryvee	That he makes his privy of his throat
Thurgh thilke cursed superfluitee.	Through that same cursed excess.
The apostel wepyng seith ful pitously,	The apostle weeping says full piteously,
"Ther walken manye of whiche yow toold have I --	"There walk many of whom I have told you --
I seye it now wepyng, with pitous voys --	I say it now weeping, with piteous voice --
They been enemys of Cristes croys,	They are enemies of Christ's cross,
Of whiche the ende is deeth; wombe is hir god!"	Of which the end is death; belly is their god!"
O wombe! O bely! O stynkyng cod,	O gut! O belly! O stinking bag,
Fulfilled of dong and of corrupcioun!	Filled with dung and with corruption!
At either ende of thee foul is the soun.	At either end of thee the sound is foul.
How greet labour and cost is thee to fynde!	How great labor and cost it is to feed thee!
Thise cookes, how they stampe, and streyne, and grynde,	These cooks, how they pound, and strain, and grind,
And turnen substaunce into accident	And turn substance into outward appearance
To fulfille al thy likerous talent!	To fulfill all thy gluttonous desire!
Out of the harde bones knokke they	Out of the hard bones they knock
The mary, for they caste noght awey	The marrow, for they throw nothing away
That may go thurgh the golet softe and swoote.	That may go through the gullet softly and sweetly.
Of spicerie of leef, and bark, and roote	Of seasonings of leaf, and bark, and root
Shal been his sauce ymaked by delit,	Shall his sauce be made for delight,
To make hym yet a newer appetit.	To make him yet a newer appetite.
But, certes, he that haunteth swiche delices	But, certainly, he who habitually seeks such delicacies
Is deed, whil that he lyveth in tho vices.	Is dead, while he lives in those vices.
A lecherous thyng is wyn, and dronkenesse	A lecherous thing is wine, and drunkenness
Is ful of stryvyng and of wrecchednesse.	Is full of striving and of wretchedness.
O dronke man, disfigured is thy face,	O drunken man, disfigured is thy face,
Sour is thy breeth, foul artow to embrace,	Sour is thy breath, foul art thou to embrace,
And thurgh thy dronke nose semeth the soun	And through thy drunken nose the sound seems
As though thou seydest ay "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"	As though thou said always "Sampson, Sampson!"
And yet, God woot, Sampsoun drank nevere no wyn.	And yet, God knows, Sampson never drank any wine.
Thou fallest as it were a styked swyn;	Thou fallest like a stuck pig;
Thy tonge is lost, and al thyn honeste cure,	Thy tongue is lost, and all thy care for decency,
For dronkenesse is verray sepulture	For drunkenness is truly the sepulcher
Of mannes wit and his discrecioun.	Of man's wit and his discretion.
In whom that drynke hath dominacioun	In whom drink has domination
He kan no conseil kepe; it is no drede.	He can keep no secrets; there is no doubt.
Now kepe yow fro the white and fro the rede,	Now guard yourself from the white and from the red,
And namely fro the white wyn of Lepe	And namely from the white wine of Lepe
That is to selle in Fysshstrete or in Chepe.	That is for sale in Fishstreet or in Cheapside.
This wyn of Spaigne crepeth subtilly	This wine of Spain creeps subtly
In othere wynes, growynge faste by,	Into other wines, growing near by,
Of which ther ryseth swich fumositee	Of which there rise such bodily vapors
That whan a man hath dronken draughtes thre,	That when a man has drunk three drafts,
And weneth that he be at hoom in Chepe,	And supposes that he is at home in Cheapside,
He is in Spaigne, right at the toune of Lepe --	He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe --
Nat at the Rochele, ne at Burdeux toun --	Not at La Rochelle, nor at Bordeaux town --
And thanne wol he seye "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"	And then will he say "Sampson, Sampson!"
But herkneth, lordynges, o word, I yow preye,	But listen, gentlemen, one word, I pray you,
That alle the sovereyn actes, dar I seye,	That all the great deeds, I dare say,
Of victories in the Olde Testament,	Of victories in the Old Testament,
Thurgh verray God, that is omnipotent,	Through true God, who is omnipotent,
Were doon in abstinence and in preyere.	Were done in abstinence and in prayer.
Looketh the Bible, and ther ye may it leere.	Look in the Bible, and there you can learn it.
Looke, Attilla, the grete conquerour,	Consider how Attila, the great conqueror,
Deyde in his sleep, with shame and dishonour,	Died in his sleep, with shame and dishonor,
Bledynge ay at his nose in dronkenesse.	Bleeding ever at his nose in drunkenness.
A capitayn sholde lyve in sobrenesse.	A captain should live in sobriety.
And over al this, avyseth yow right wel	And beyond all this, consider right well
What was comaunded unto Lamuel --	What was commanded unto Lamuel --
Nat Samuel, but Lamuel, seye I;	Not Samuel, but Lamuel, I say;
Redeth the Bible, and fynde it expresly	Read the Bible, and find it explicitly
Of wyn-yevyng to hem that han justise.	About giving wine to those that have the duty of doing justice.
Namoore of this, for it may wel suffise.	No more of this, for it may well suffice.
And now that I have spoken of glotonye,	And now that I have spoken of gluttony,
Now wol I yow deffenden hasardrye.	Now I will forbid you gambling.
Hasard is verray mooder of lesynges,	Dicing is the true mother of lies,
And of deceite, and cursed forswerynges,	And of deceit, and cursed perjuries,
Blaspheme of Crist, manslaughtre, and wast also	Blasphemy of Christ, manslaughter, and waste also
Of catel and of tyme; and forthermo,	Of possessions and of time; and furthermore,
It is repreeve and contrarie of honour	It is a disgrace and contrary to honor
For to ben holde a commune hasardour.	To be considered a common dice player.
And ever the hyer he is of estaat,	And ever the higher he is of estate,
The moore is he yholden desolaat.	The more is he considered abandoned (to shame).
If that a prynce useth hasardrye,	If a prince plays at dicing,
In alle governaunce and policye	In all governance and policy
He is, as by commune opinioun,	He is, by common opinion,
Yholde the lasse in reputacioun.	Held the less in reputation.
Stilboun, that was a wys embassadour,	Stilboun, who was a wise ambassador,
Was sent to Corynthe in ful greet honour	Was sent to Corinth in very great honor
Fro Lacidomye to make hire alliaunce.	From Sparta to make their alliance.
And whan he cam, hym happede, par chaunce,	And when he came, it happened, by chance,
That alle the gretteste that were of that lond,	That all the greatest men that were of that land,
Pleyynge atte hasard he hem fond.	Playing at dice he found them.
For which, as soone as it myghte be,	For which, as soon as it could be,
He stal hym hoom agayn to his contree,	He stole home again to his country,
And seyde, "Ther wol I nat lese my name,	And said, "There I will not lose my reputation,
Ne I wol nat take on me so greet defame,	Nor will I take on me so great infamy,
Yow for to allie unto none hasardours.	To ally you unto any dice-players.
Sendeth othere wise embassadours;	Send other wise ambassadors;
For, by my trouthe, me were levere dye	For, by my troth, I would rather die
Than I yow sholde to hasardours allye.	Than I should ally you to dice-players.
For ye, that been so glorious in honours,	For you, that are so glorious in honors,
Shul nat allyen yow with hasardours	Shall not ally yourselves with dice-players
As by my wyl, ne as by my tretee."	By my will, nor by my negotiation."
This wise philosophre, thus seyde hee.	This wise philosopher, thus said he.
Looke eek that to the kyng Demetrius	Consider also that to the king Demetrius
The kyng of Parthes, as the book seith us,	The king of Parthia, as the book tells us,
Sente him a paire of dees of gold in scorn,	Sent him a pair of dice of gold in scorn,
For he hadde used hasard ther-biforn;	Because he had played at dicing before that;
For which he heeld his glorie or his renoun	For which he held his glory or his renown
At no value or reputacioun.	At no value or esteem.
Lordes may fynden oother maner pley	Lords may find other sorts of play
Honest ynough to dryve the day awey.	Respectable enough to pass the time.
Now wol I speke of othes false and grete	Now will I speak of oaths false and great
A word or two, as olde bookes trete.	A word or two, as old books treat them.
Gret sweryng is a thyng abhominable,	Great swearing is an abominable thing,
And fals sweryng is yet moore reprevable.	And false swearing is yet more worthy of reproof.
The heighe God forbad sweryng at al,	The high God forbad swearing at al,
Witnesse on Mathew; but in special	Witness on Matthew; but in special
Of sweryng seith the hooly Jeremye,	Of swearing says the holy Jeremiah,
"Thou shalt swere sooth thyne othes, and nat lye,	"Thou shall swear truly thine oaths, and not lie,
And swere in doom and eek in rightwisnesse";	And in judgement and also in righteousness";
But ydel sweryng is a cursednesse.	But idle swearing is a cursed thing.
Bihoold and se that in the firste table	Behold and see that in the first three
Of heighe Goddes heestes honurable,	Of high God's honorable commandments,
Hou that the seconde heeste of hym is this:	How the second of his commands is this:
"Take nat my name in ydel or amys."	"Take not my name in vain nor amiss."
Lo, rather he forbedeth swich sweryng	Lo, he forbids such swearing rather
Than homycide or many a cursed thyng;	Than homicide or many a cursed thing;
I seye that, as by ordre, thus it stondeth;	I say that, so far as order is concerned, thus it stands;
This knoweth, that his heestes understondeth,	He who understands his commandments knows this,
How that the seconde heeste of God is that.	How that is the second command of God.
And forther over, I wol thee telle al plat	And furthermore, I will tell thee flatly
That vengeance shal nat parten from his hous	That vengeance shall not part from his house
That of his othes is to outrageous.	Who of his oaths is too excessive.
"By Goddes precious herte," and "By his nayles,"	"By God's precious heart," and "By his nails,"
And "By the blood of Crist that is in Hayles,	And "By the blood of Christ that is in Hales Abbey,
Sevene is my chaunce, and thyn is cynk and treye!"	Seven is my number, and thine is five and three!"
"By Goddes armes, if thou falsly pleye,	"By God's arms, if thou falsely play,
This daggere shal thurghout thyn herte go!" --	This dagger shall go throughout thy heart!" --
This fruyt cometh of the bicched bones two,	This fruit comes of the two cursed dice,
Forsweryng, ire, falsnesse, homycide.	Perjury, anger, falseness, homicide.
Now, for the love of Crist, that for us dyde,	Now, for the love of Christ, who for us died,
Lete youre othes, bothe grete and smale.	Leave your oaths, both great and small.
But, sires, now wol I telle forth my tale.	But, sirs, now will I tell forth my tale.
Thise riotoures thre of whiche I telle,	These three rioters of whom I tell,
Longe erst er prime rong of any belle,	Long before prime rang of any bell,
Were set hem in a taverne to drynke,	Had set themselves in a tavern to drink,
And as they sat, they herde a belle clynke	And as they sat, they heard a bell clink
Biforn a cors, was caried to his grave.	Before a corpse, which was carried to its grave.
That oon of hem gan callen to his knave:	The one of them did call to his servant:
"Go bet," quod he, "and axe redily	"Go quickly," he said, "and ask at once
What cors is this that passeth heer forby;	What corpse is this that passes by here;
And looke that thou reporte his name weel."	And see that thou report his name correctly."
"Sire," quod this boy, "it nedeth never-a-deel;	"Sir," said this boy, "that is not at all necessary;
It was me toold er ye cam heer two houres.	It was told me two hours before you came here.
He was, pardee, an old felawe of youres,	He was, indeed, an old fellow of yours,
And sodeynly he was yslayn to-nyght,	And suddenly he was slain last night,
Fordronke, as he sat on his bench upright.	Completely drunk, as he sat on his bench upright.
Ther cam a privee theef men clepeth Deeth,	There came a stealthy thief men call Death,
That in this contree al the peple sleeth,	Who slays all the people in this country,
And with his spere he smoot his herte atwo,	And with his spear he struck his heart in two,
And wente his wey withouten wordes mo.	And went his way without more words.
He hath a thousand slayn this pestilence.	He has slain a thousand (during) this pestilence.
And, maister, er ye come in his presence,	And, master, before you come in his presence,
Me thynketh that it were necessarie	It seems to me that it would be necessary
For to be war of swich an adversarie.	To beware of such an adversary.
Beth redy for to meete hym everemoore;	Always be ready to meet him;
Thus taughte me my dame; I sey namoore."	Thus taught me my mother; I say no more."
"By Seinte Marie!" seyde this taverner,	"By Saint Mary!" said this tavern-keeper,
"The child seith sooth, for he hath slayn this yeer,	"The child says truth, for he has slain this year,
Henne over a mile, withinne a greet village,	Over a mile from here, within a great village,
Bothe man and womman, child, and hyne, and page;	Both man and woman, child, and laborer, and servant boy;
I trowe his habitacioun be there.	I suppose his habitation is there.
To been avysed greet wysdom it were,	It would be great wisdom to be forewarned,
Er that he dide a man a dishonour."	Before he did a man any harm."
"Ye, Goddes armes!" quod this riotour,	"Yea, God's arms!" said this rioter,
"Is it swich peril with hym for to meete?	"Is it such peril to meet with him?
I shal hym seke by wey and eek by strete,	I shall seek him by path-way and also by street (everywhere),
I make avow to Goddes digne bones!	I make a vow to God's honorable bones!
Herkneth, felawes, we thre been al ones;	Listen, fellows, we three are all agreed;
Lat ech of us holde up his hand til oother,	Let each of us hold up his hand to other,
And ech of us bicomen otheres brother,	And each of us become the others' brother,
And we wol sleen this false traytour Deeth.	And we will slay this false traitor Death.
He shal be slayn, he that so manye sleeth,	He shall be slain, he who slays so many,
By Goddes dignitee, er it be nyght!"	By God's dignity, before it be night!"
Togidres han thise thre hir trouthes plight	Together have these three pledged their troths
To lyve and dyen ech of hem for oother,	To live and die each of them for other,
As though he were his owene ybore brother.	As though he were his own born brother.
And up they stirte, al dronken in this rage,	And up they leaped, all drunken in this rage,
And forth they goon towardes that village	And forth they go towards that village
Of which the taverner hadde spoke biforn.	Of which the tavern-keeper had spoken before.
And many a grisly ooth thanne han they sworn,	And many a grisly oath then have they sworn,
And Cristes blessed body they torente --	And Christ's blessed body they tore to pieces --
Deeth shal be deed, if that they may hym hente!	Death shall be dead, if they can catch him!
Whan they han goon nat fully half a mile,	When they have gone not fully half a mile,
Right as they wolde han troden over a stile,	Right as they would have stepped over a fence,
An oold man and a povre with hem mette.	An old and poor man met with them.
This olde man ful mekely hem grette,	This old man full meekly greeted them,
And seyde thus, "Now, lordes, God yow see!"	And said thus, "Now, lords, may God look after you!"
The proudeste of thise riotoures three	The proudest of these three rioters
Answerde agayn, "What, carl, with sory grace!	Answered in reply, "What, churl, bad luck to you!
Why artow al forwrapped save thy face?	Why art thou all wrapped up except for thy face?
Why lyvestow so longe in so greet age?"	Why live thou so long in such old age?"
This olde man gan looke in his visage,	This old man did look in his face,
And seyde thus: "For I ne kan nat fynde	And said thus: "Because I can not find
A man, though that I walked into Ynde,	A man, though I walked to India,
Neither in citee ne in no village,	Neither in city nor in any village,
That wolde chaunge his youthe for myn age;	That would change his youth for my age;
And therfore moot I han myn age stille,	And therefore I must have my age still,
As longe tyme as it is Goddes wille.	As long a time as it is God's will.
Ne Deeth, allas, ne wol nat han my lyf.	Nor Death, alas, will not have my life.
Thus walke I, lyk a restelees kaityf,	Thus I walk, like a restless wretch,
And on the ground, which is my moodres gate,	And on the ground, which is my mother's gate,
I knokke with my staf, bothe erly and late,	I knock with my staff, both early and late,
And seye `Leeve mooder, leet me in!	And say `Dear mother, let me in!
Lo how I vanysshe, flessh, and blood, and skyn!	Lo how I waste away, flesh, and blood, and skin!
Allas, whan shul my bones been at reste?	Alas, when shall my bones be at rest?
Mooder, with yow wolde I chaunge my cheste	Mother, with you would I exchange my strongbox
That in my chambre longe tyme hath be,	That in my chamber long time has been,
Ye, for an heyre clowt to wrappe me!'	Yea, for an hair shirt to wrap me!'
But yet to me she wol nat do that grace,	But yet to me she will not do that favor,
For which ful pale and welked is my face.	For which full pale and withered is my face.
"But, sires, to yow it is no curteisye	"But, sirs, to you it is no courtesy
To speken to an old man vileynye,	To speak rudeness to an old man,
But he trespasse in word or elles in dede.	Unless he trespass in word or else in deed.
In Hooly Writ ye may yourself wel rede:	In Holy Writ you may yourself well read:
`Agayns an oold man, hoor upon his heed,	`In the presence of an old man, gray upon his head,
Ye sholde arise;' wherfore I yeve yow reed,	You should rise;' therefore I give you advice,
Ne dooth unto an oold man noon harm now,	Do no harm now unto an old man,
Namoore than that ye wolde men did to yow	No more than you would want men to do to you
In age, if that ye so longe abyde.	In old age, if you live so long.
And God be with yow, where ye go or ryde!	And God be with you, wherever you walk or ride!
I moot go thider as I have to go."	I must go thither where I have to go."
"Nay, olde cherl, by God, thou shalt nat so,"	"Nay, old churl, by God, thou shall not so,"
Seyde this oother hasardour anon;	Said this other dice-player quickly;
"Thou partest nat so lightly, by Seint John!	"Thou depart not so quickly, by Saint John!
Thou spak right now of thilke traytour Deeth.	Thou spoke right now of that same traitor Death.
That in this contree alle oure freendes sleeth.	That slays all our friends in this country.
Have heer my trouthe, as thou art his espye,	Have here my pledge, as thou art his spy,
Telle where he is or thou shalt it abye,	Tell where he is or thou shall pay for it,
By God and by the hooly sacrement!	By God and by the holy sacrament!
For soothly thou art oon of his assent	For truly thou art in league with him
To sleen us yonge folk, thou false theef!"	To slay us young folk, thou false thief!"
"Now, sires," quod he, "if that yow be so leef	"Now, sirs," said he, "if you are so eager
To fynde Deeth, turne up this croked wey,	To find Death, turn up this crooked way,
For in that grove I lafte hym, by my fey,	For in that grove I left him, by my faith,
Under a tree, and there he wole abyde;	Under a tree, and there he will wait;
Noght for youre boost he wole him no thyng hyde.	He will not in any way hide himself because of your boast.
Se ye that ook? Right there ye shal hym fynde.	Do you see that oak? Right there you shall find him.
God save yow, that boghte agayn mankynde,	God save you, He who redeemed mankind,
And yow amende!" Thus seyde this olde man;	And amend you!" Thus said this old man;
And everich of thise riotoures ran	And every one of these rioters ran
Til he cam to that tree, and ther they founde	Until he came to that tree, and there they found
Of floryns fyne of gold ycoyned rounde	Of fine round florins of coined gold
Wel ny an eighte busshels, as hem thoughte.	Well nigh eight bushels, as they thought.
No lenger thanne after Deeth they soughte,	No longer then after Death they sought,
But ech of hem so glad was of that sighte,	But each of them was so glad of that sight,
For that the floryns been so faire and brighte,	Because the florins are so faire and bright,
That doun they sette hem by this precious hoord.	That they set themselves down by this precious hoard.
The worste of hem, he spak the firste word.	The worst of them, he spoke the first word.
"Bretheren," quod he, "taak kep what that I seye;	"Brethren," he said, "take heed of what I say;
My wit is greet, though that I bourde and pleye.	My wit is great, though I jest and play.
This tresor hath Fortune unto us yiven	Fortune has given this treasure unto us
In myrthe and joliftee oure lyf to lyven,	In mirth and jollity to live our life,
And lightly as it comth, so wol we spende.	And as easily as it comes, so will we spend it.
Ey, Goddes precious dignitee! Who wende	Ah, God's precious dignity! Who would have supposed
To-day that we sholde han so fair a grace?	To-day that we should have such good fortune?
But myghte this gold be caried fro this place	But if this gold could be carried from this place
Hoom to myn hous, or elles unto youres --	Home to my house, or else unto yours --
For wel ye woot that al this gold is oures --	For well you know that all this gold is ours --
Thanne were we in heigh felicitee.	Then we would be in great happiness.
But trewely, by daye it may nat bee.	But truly, it may not be (done) by day.
Men wolde seyn that we were theves stronge,	Men would say that we were arrant thieves,
And for oure owene tresor doon us honge.	And for our own treasure have us hanged.
This tresor moste ycaried be by nyghte	This treasure must be carried by night
As wisely and as slyly as it myghte.	As wisely and as slyly as it can be.
Wherfore I rede that cut among us alle	Wherefore I advise that among us all straws
Be drawe, and lat se wher the cut wol falle;	Be drawn, and let's see where the lot will fall;
And he that hath the cut with herte blithe	And he who has the shortest straw with happy heart
Shal renne to the town, and that ful swithe,	Shall run to the town, and that very quickly,
And brynge us breed and wyn ful prively.	And very secretly bring us bread and wine.
And two of us shul kepen subtilly	And two of us shall carefully guard
This tresor wel; and if he wol nat tarie,	This treasure well; and if he will not tarry,
Whan it is nyght, we wol this tresor carie,	When it is night, we will carry this treasure,
By oon assent, where as us thynketh best."	By mutual agreement, where we think best."
That oon of hem the cut broghte in his fest,	That one of them brought the straws in his fist,
And bad hem drawe and looke where it wol falle;	And commanded them to draw and see where it will fall;
And it fil on the yongeste of hem alle,	And it fell on the youngest of them all,
And forth toward the toun he wente anon.	And forth toward the town he went right away.
And also soone as that he was gon,	And as soon as he was gone,
That oon of hem spak thus unto that oother:	The one of them spoke thus unto that other:
"Thow knowest wel thou art my sworen brother;	"Thou knowest well thou art my sworn brother;
Thy profit wol I telle thee anon.	Thy profit will I tell thee straightway.
Thou woost wel that oure felawe is agon.	Thou knowest well that our fellow is gone.
And heere is gold, and that ful greet plentee,	And here is gold, and that a full great quantity,
That shal departed been among us thre.	That shall be divided among us three.
But nathelees, if I kan shape it so	But nevertheless, if I can arrange things so
That it departed were among us two,	That it were divided among us two,
Hadde I nat doon a freendes torn to thee?"	Had I not done a good turn to thee?"
That oother answerde, "I noot hou that may be.	That other answered, "I know not how that can be.
He woot that the gold is with us tweye;	He knows that the gold is with us two;
What shal we doon? What shal we to hym seye?"	What shall we do? What shall we say to him?"
"Shal it be conseil?" seyde the firste shrewe,	"Shall it be (our) secret plan?" said the first scoundrel,
"And I shal tellen in a wordes fewe	"And I shall tell in a few words
What we shal doon, and brynge it wel aboute."	What we shall do, and bring it well about."
"I graunte," quod that oother, "out of doute,	"I agree," said that other, "without doubt,
That, by my trouthe, I wol thee nat biwreye."	That, by my troth, I will not betray thee."
"Now," quod the firste, "thou woost wel we be tweye,	"Now," said the first, "thou knowest well we are two,
And two of us shul strenger be than oon.	And two of us shall be stronger than one.
Looke whan that he is set, that right anoon	Look, when he has set down, right away
Arys as though thou woldest with hym pleye,	Arise as though thou would with him play,
And I shal ryve hym thurgh the sydes tweye	And I shall stab him through the two sides
Whil that thou strogelest with hym as in game,	While thou struggle with him as in game,
And with thy daggere looke thou do the same;	And with thy dagger see that thou do the same;
And thanne shal al this gold departed be,	And then shall all this gold be divided,
My deere freend, bitwixen me and thee.	My dear friend, between me and thee.
Thanne may we bothe oure lustes all fulfille,	Then we both can fulfill all our desires,
And pleye at dees right at oure owene wille."	And play at dice just as we wish,"
And thus acorded been thise shrewes tweye	And thus these two scoundrels are agreed
To sleen the thridde, as ye han herd me seye.	To slay the third, as you have heard me say.
This yongeste, which that wente to the toun,	This youngest, who went to the town,
Ful ofte in herte he rolleth up and doun	Very often in heart he rolls up and down
The beautee of thise floryns newe and brighte.	The beauty of these florins new and bright.
"O Lord!" quod he, "if so were that I myghte	"O Lord!" he said, "if it would be that I might
Have al this tresor to myself allone,	Have all this treasure to myself alone,
Ther is no man that lyveth under the trone	There is no man that lives under the throne
Of God that sholde lyve so murye as I!"	Of God that should live so merrily as I!"
And atte laste the feend, oure enemy,	And at the last the fiend, our enemy,
Putte in his thought that he sholde poyson beye,	Put in his thought that he should buy poison,
With which he myghte sleen his felawes tweye;	With which he might slay his two fellows;
For-why the feend foond hym in swich lyvynge	Because the fiend found him in such a manner of living
That he hadde leve him to sorwe brynge.	That he had leave bring him to sorrow.
For this was outrely his fulle entente,	For this was utterly his full intention,
To sleen hem bothe and nevere to repente.	To slay them both and never to repent.
And forth he gooth, no lenger wolde he tarie,	And forth he goes, no longer would he tarry,
Into the toun, unto a pothecarie,	Into the town, unto an apothecary,
And preyde hym that he hym wolde selle	And prayed him that he would sell him
Som poyson, that he myghte his rattes quelle;	Some poison, that he might kill his rats;
And eek ther was a polcat in his hawe,	And also there was a polecat in his yard,
That, as he seyde, his capouns hadde yslawe,	That, as he said, had slain his capons,
And fayn he wolde wreke hym, if he myghte,	And he would gladly revenge himself, if he could,
On vermyn that destroyed hym by nyghte.	On vermin that ruined him by night.
The pothecarie answerde, "And thou shalt have	The apothecary answered, "And thou shall have
A thyng that, also God my soule save,	A thing that, as God may save my soul,
In al this world ther is no creature	In all this world there is no creature
That eten or dronken hath of this confiture	That has eaten or drunk of this concoction
Noght but the montance of a corn of whete,	Only so much as the amount of a seed of wheat,
That he ne shal his lif anon forlete;	That he shall not immediately lose his life;
Ye, sterve he shal, and that in lasse while	Yea, he shall die, and that in less time
Than thou wolt goon a paas nat but a mile,	Than thou will go at a walk but only a mile,
This poysoun is so strong and violent."	This poison is so strong and violent."
This cursed man hath in his hond yhent	This cursed man has in his hand taken
This poysoun in a box, and sith he ran	This poison in a box, and then he ran
Into the nexte strete unto a man,	Into the next street unto a man,
And borwed [of] hym large botelles thre,	And borrowed [of] him three large bottles,
And in the two his poyson poured he;	And in the two he poured his poison;
The thridde he kepte clene for his drynke.	The third he kept clean for his drink.
For al the nyght he shoop hym for to swynke	For all the night he intended to work
In cariynge of the gold out of that place.	In carrying of the gold out of that place.
And whan this riotour, with sory grace,	And when this rioter, bad luck to him,
Hadde filled with wyn his grete botels thre,	Had filled his three big bottles with wine,
To his felawes agayn repaireth he.	He goes back again to his fellows.
What nedeth it to sermone of it moore?	What needs it to preach of it more?
For right as they hadde cast his deeth bifoore,	For right as they had planned his death before,
Right so they han hym slayn, and that anon.	Right so they have him slain, and that immediately.
And whan that this was doon, thus spak that oon:	And when this was done, thus spoke that one:
"Now lat us sitte and drynke, and make us merie,	"Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry,
And afterward we wol his body berie."	And afterward we will bury his body."
And with that word it happed hym, par cas,	And with that word it happened to him, by chance,
To take the botel ther the poyson was,	To take the bottle where the poison was,
And drank, and yaf his felawe drynke also,	And drank, and gave his fellow drink also,
For which anon they storven bothe two.	For which straightway they died, both of the two.
But certes, I suppose that Avycen	But certainly, I suppose that Avicenna
Wroot nevere in no canon, ne in no fen,	Wrote never in any authoritative book, nor in any chapter,
Mo wonder signes of empoisonyng	More wondrous symptoms of poisoning
Than hadde thise wrecches two, er hir endyng.	Than had these two wretches, before their ending.
Thus ended been thise homycides two,	Thus ended are these two homicides,
And eek the false empoysonere also.	And also the false poisoner as well.
O cursed synne of alle cursednesse!	O cursed sin of all cursedness!
O traytours homycide, O wikkednesse!	O treacherous homicide, O wickedness!
O glotonye, luxurie, and hasardrye!	O gluttony, lechery, and dicing!
Thou blasphemour of Crist with vileynye	Thou blasphemer of Christ with churlish speech
And othes grete, of usage and of pride!	And great oaths, out of habit and out of pride!
Allas, mankynde, how may it bitide	Alas, mankind, how may it happen
That to thy creatour, which that the wroghte	That to thy creator, who made thee
And with his precious herte-blood thee boghte,	And with his precious heart's blood redeemed thee,
Thou art so fals and so unkynde, allas?	Thou art so false and so unnatural, alas?
Now, goode men, God foryeve yow youre trespas,	Now, good men, God forgive you your trespass,
And ware yow fro the synne of avarice!	And guard yourselves from the sin of avarice!
Myn hooly pardoun may yow alle warice,	My holy pardon can cure you all,
So that ye offre nobles or sterlynges,	Providing that you offer gold coins or silver pennies,
Or elles silver broches, spoones, rynges.	Or else silver brooches, spoons, rings.
Boweth youre heed under this hooly bulle!	Bow your head under this holy papal bull!
Cometh up, ye wyves, offreth of youre wolle!	Come up, you wives, offer some of your wool!
Youre names I entre heer in my rolle anon;	Your names I enter here in my roll immediately;
Into the blisse of hevene shul ye gon.	Into the bliss of heaven you shall go.
I yow assoille, by myn heigh power,	I absolve you, by my high power,
Yow that wol offre, as clene and eek as cleer	You who will offer, as clean and also as clear (of sin)
As ye were born. -- And lo, sires, thus I preche.	As you were born. -- And lo, sirs, thus I preach.
And Jhesu Crist, that is oure soules leche,	And Jesus Christ, that is our souls' physician,
So graunte yow his pardoun to receyve,	So grant you to receive his pardon,
For that is best; I wol yow nat deceyve.	For that is best; I will not deceive you.
But, sires, o word forgat I in my tale:	But, sirs, one word I forgot in my tale:
I have relikes and pardoun in my male,	I have relics and pardons in my bag,
As faire as any man in Engelond,	As fine as any man in England,
Whiche were me yeven by the popes hond.	Which were given to me by the pope's hand.
If any of yow wole, of devocion,	If any of you will, of devotion,
Offren and han myn absolucion,	Offer and have my absolution,
Com forth anon, and kneleth heere adoun,	Come forth straightway, and kneel down here,
And mekely receyveth my pardoun;	And meekly receive my pardon;
Or elles taketh pardoun as ye wende,	Or else take pardon as you travel,
Al newe and fressh at every miles ende,	All new and fresh at every mile's end,
So that ye offren, alwey newe and newe,	Providing that you offer, again and again,
Nobles or pens, whiche that be goode and trewe.	Gold coins or silver pennies, which are good and true.
It is an honour to everich that is heer	It is an honor to every one that is here
That ye mowe have a suffisant pardoneer	That you may have a pardoner with sufficient power
T' assoille yow in contree as ye ryde,	To absolve you in the countryside as you ride,
For aventures whiche that may bityde.	For accidents that may happen.
Paraventure ther may fallen oon or two	Perhaps there may fall one or two
Doun of his hors and breke his nekke atwo.	Down off his horse and break his neck in two.
Looke which a seuretee is it to yow alle	Look what a safeguard is it to you all
That I am in youre felaweshipe yfalle,	That I happen to be in your fellowship,
That may assoille yow, bothe moore and lasse,	Who can absolve you, both more and less (every one),
Whan that the soule shal fro the body passe.	When the soul shall from the body pass.
I rede that oure Hoost heere shal bigynne,	I advise that our Host here shall begin,
For he is moost envoluped in synne.	For he is most enveloped in sin.
Com forth, sire Hoost, and offre first anon,	Come forth, sir Host, and offer first right now,
And thou shalt kisse the relikes everychon,	And thou shall kiss the relics every one,
Ye, for a grote! Unbokele anon thy purs."	Yea, for a fourpence coin! Unbuckle thy purse right now."
"Nay, nay!" quod he, "thanne have I Cristes curs!	"Nay, nay!" he said, "then I will have Christ's curse!
Lat be," quod he, "it shal nat be, so theech!	Let it be," he said, "it shall not be, as I may prosper!
Thou woldest make me kisse thyn olde breech,	Thou would make me kiss thine old underpants,
And swere it were a relyk of a seint,	And swear it was a relic of a saint,
Though it were with thy fundement depeint!	Though it were stained by thy fundament!
But, by the croys which that Seint Eleyne fond,	But, by the cross that Saint Helen found,
I wolde I hadde thy coillons in myn hond	I would I had thy testicles in my hand
In stide of relikes or of seintuarie.	Instead of relics or a container for relics.
Lat kutte hem of, I wol thee helpe hem carie;	Have them cut off, I will help thee carry them;
They shul be shryned in an hogges toord!"	They shall be enshrined in a hog's turd!"
This Pardoner answerde nat a word;	This Pardoner answered not a word;
So wrooth he was, no word ne wolde he seye.	So angry he was, no word would he say.
"Now," quod oure Hoost, "I wol no lenger pleye	"Now," said our Host, "I will no longer joke
With thee, ne with noon oother angry man."	With thee, nor with any other angry man."
But right anon the worthy Knyght bigan,	But immediately the worthy Knight began,
Whan that he saugh that al the peple lough,	When he saw that all the people laughed,
"Namoore of this, for it is right ynough!	"No more of this, for it is right enough!
Sire Pardoner, be glad and myrie of cheere;	Sir Pardoner, be glad and merry of cheer;
And ye, sire Hoost, that been to me so deere,	And you, sir Host, who are so dear to me,
I prey yow that ye kisse the Pardoner.	I pray you that you kiss the Pardoner.
And Pardoner, I prey thee, drawe thee neer,	And Pardoner, I pray thee, draw thyself nearer,
And, as we diden, lat us laughe and pleye."	And, as we did, let us laugh and play."
Anon they kiste, and ryden forth hir weye.	At once they kissed, and rode forth their way.
The ministre and the norice unto vices,	The minister and the nurse of vices,
Which that men clepe in Englissh Ydelnesse,	Which men call in English Idleness,
That porter of the gate is of delices,	Who is porter of the gate of pleasures
To eschue, and by hire contrarie hire oppresse --	To shun, and by her contrary to overcome her --
That is to seyn, by leveful bisynesse --	That is to say, by keeping busy in lawful good works --
Wel oghten we to doon al oure entente,	Well ought we to do all our diligence
Lest that the feend thurgh ydelnesse us hente.	Lest the fiend by means of idleness seize us.
For he that with his thousand cordes slye	For he that with his thousand sly snares
Continuelly us waiteth to biclappe,	Continually lies in wait to seize us suddenly,
Whan he may man in ydelnesse espye,	When he can espy a man in idleness,
He kan so lightly cache hym in his trappe,	He can catch him in his trap so quickly,
Til that a man be hent right by the lappe,	That until a man is seized right by the hem of his garment,
He nys nat war the feend hath hym in honde.	He is not aware that the fiend has him in hand.
Wel oghte us werche and ydelnesse withstonde.	Well ought we to work and resist idleness.
And though men dradden nevere for to dye,	And even though people never dreaded to die,
Yet seen men wel by resoun, doutelees,	Yet they can well see by reason, doubtless,
That ydelnesse is roten slogardye,	That idleness is rotten laziness,
Of which ther nevere comth no good n' encrees;	From which there never comes any good or profit;
And syn that slouthe hire holdeth in a lees	And since sloth holds her (Idleness) on a leash
Oonly to slepe, and for to ete and drynke,	(Allowing her) only to sleep, and to eat and drink,
And to devouren al that othere swynke,	And to devour all that others earn by working,
And for to putte us fro swich ydelnesse,	And in order to set us apart from such idleness,
That cause is of so greet confusioun,	Which is the cause of such great ruin,
I have heer doon my feithful bisynesse	I have here done my faithful efforts
After the legende in translacioun	In translating the legend
Right of thy glorious lif and passioun,	Correctly of thy glorious life and suffering,
Thou with thy gerland wroght with rose and lilie --	Thou with thy garland made with rose and lily --
Thee meene I, mayde and martyr, Seint Cecilie.	I mean thee, maid and martyr, Saint Cecilie.
And thow that flour of virgines art alle,	And thou who art the flower of all virgins,
Of whom that Bernard list so wel to write,	Of whom it so well pleased Bernard to write,
To thee at my bigynnyng first I calle;	To thee at my beginning first I call;
Thou confort of us wrecches, do me endite	Thou comfort of us wretches, let me narrate
Thy maydens deeth, that wan thurgh hire merite	Thy maiden's death, that won by means of her merit
The eterneel lyf and of the feend victorie,	The eternal life and victory over the fiend,
As man may after reden in hire storie.	As one may hereafter read in her story.
Thow Mayde and Mooder, doghter of thy Sone,	Thou Maid and Mother, daughter of thy Son,
Thow welle of mercy, synful soules cure,	Thou well of mercy, sinful souls' cure,
In whom that God for bountee chees to wone,	In whom God for goodness chose to dwell,
Thow humble, and heigh over every creature,	Thou humble, and high over every creature,
Thow nobledest so ferforth oure nature,	Thou so greatly enobled our nature,
That no desdeyn the Makere hadde of kynde	That the Maker of humankind had no disdain
His Sone in blood and flessh to clothe and wynde.	To clothe and wrap His Son in blood and flesh.
Withinne the cloistre blisful of thy sydis	Within the blissful cloister of thy sides
Took mannes shap the eterneel love and pees,	The eternal love and peace took man's shape,
That of the tryne compas lord and gyde is,	He who is lord and guide of the threefold universe,
Whom erthe and see and hevene out of relees	Whom earth and sea and heaven unceasing
Ay heryen; and thou, Virgine wemmelees,	Ever praise; and thou, Virgin without blemish,
Baar of thy body -- and dweltest mayden pure --	Bore in thy body -- and remained maiden pure --
The Creatour of every creature.	The Creator of every creature.
Assembled is in thee magnificence	Magnificence is in thee combined
With mercy, goodnesse, and with swich pitee	With mercy, goodness, and with such pity
That thou, that art the sonne of excellence	That thou, who art the sun of excellence
Nat oonly helpest hem that preyen thee,	Not only helpest them that pray thee,
But often tyme of thy benygnytee	But often of thy goodness
Ful frely, er that men thyn help biseche,	Very willingly, before men beseech thine help,
Thou goost biforn and art hir lyves leche.	Thou goest before and art their lives' physician.
Now help, thow meeke and blisful faire mayde,	Now, thou meek and blissful fair maid help
Me, flemed wrecche, in this desert of galle;	Me, banished exile, in this desert of bitterness;
Thynk on the womman Cananee, that sayde	Think on the Cananite woman, who said
That whelpes eten somme of the crommes alle	That dogs eat some of all the crumbs
That from hir lordes table been yfalle;	That from their lord's table are fallen;
And though that I, unworthy sone of Eve,	And though that I, unworthy son of Eve,
Be synful, yet accepte my bileve.	Be sinful, yet accept my faith.
And, for that feith is deed withouten werkis,	And, because faith is dead without works,
So for to werken yif me wit and space,	Give me wit and opportunity to work so,
That I be quit fro thennes that most derk is!	That I may be free from that place that is most dark!
O thou, that art so fair and ful of grace,	O thou, that art so fair and full of grace,
Be myn advocat in that heighe place	Be my advocate in that high place
Theras withouten ende is songe "Osanne,"	Where unceasingly is sung "Hosanna,"
Thow Cristes mooder, doghter deere of Anne!	Thou Christ's mother, daughter dear of Anne!
And of thy light my soule in prison lighte,	And of thy light enlighten in prison my soul,
That troubled is by the contagioun	That is troubled by the contamination
Of my body, and also by the wighte	Of my body, and also by the weight
Of erthely lust and fals affeccioun;	Of earthly lust and false desires;
O havene of refut, O salvacioun	O haven of refuge, O salvation
Of hem that been in sorwe and in distresse,	Of those who are in sorrow and in distress,
Now help, for to my werk I wol me dresse.	Now help, for to my work I will address myself.
Yet preye I yow that reden that I write,	Yet I pray you who read what I write,
Foryeve me that I do no diligence	Forgive me that I make no effort
This ilke storie subtilly to endite,	To narrate this same story elaborately,
For bothe have I the wordes and sentence	For I have both the words and the meaning
Of hym that at the seintes reverence	Of him who out of reverence for the saint
The storie wroot, and folwen hire legende,	Wrote the story, and (I) follow her legend,
And pray yow that ye wole my werk amende.	And pray you that you will correct (any errors in) my work.
First wolde I yow the name of Seint Cecilie	First the name of Saint Cecilie I would to you
Expowne, as men may in hir storie see.	Explain, as one can see in her story.
It is to seye in Englissh "hevenes lilie,"	It is to say in English "heaven's lily,"
For pure chaastnesse of virginitee;	For pure chastity of virginity;
Or, for she whitnesse hadde of honestee,	Or, because she had whiteness because of chastity,
And grene of conscience, and of good fame	And green because of conscience and of good reputation
The soote savour, "lilie" was hir name.	The sweet smell, "lily" was her name.
Or Cecilie is to seye "the wey to blynde,"	Or Cecilie is to mean "the way for the blind,"
For she ensample was by good techynge;	Because she set an example by good teaching;
Or elles Cecile, as I writen fynde,	Or else Cecile, as I written find,
Is joyned, by a manere conjoynynge	Is joined, by a sort of combination
Of "hevene" and "Lia"; and heere, in figurynge,	Of "heaven" and "Leah"; and here, symbolically,
The "hevene" is set for thoght of hoolynesse,	The "heaven" is set for her holiness of thought,
And "Lia" for hire lastynge bisynesse.	And "Leah" for her constant business.
Cecile may eek be seyd in this manere,	Cecile may also be explained in this manner,
"Wantynge of blyndnesse," for hir grete light	"Lack of blindness," for her great light
Of sapience and for hire thewes cleere;	Of wisdom and for her pure morals;
Or elles, loo, this maydens name bright	Or else, lo, this maidens bright name
Of "hevene" and "leos" comth, for which by right	Comes from "heaven" and "leos," for which rightly
Men myghte hire wel "the hevene of peple" calle,	Men could well call her "the heaven of people,"
Ensample of goode and wise werkes alle.	Exemplar of all good and wise works.
For "leos" "peple" in Englissh is to seye,	For "leos" in English means "people,"
And right as men may in the hevene see	And just as men may in the heaven see
The sonne and moone and sterres every weye,	The sun and moon and stars in every direction,
Right so men goostly in this mayden free	Just so in this maiden men spiritually
Seyen of feith the magnanymytee,	See the greatness of spirit of faith,
And eek the cleernesse hool of sapience,	And also the complete clarity of wisdom,
And sondry werkes, brighte of excellence.	And various works, bright because of their excellence.
And right so as thise philosophres write	And just as these scientists write
That hevene is swift and round and eek brennynge,	That heaven is swift and round and also burning,
Right so was faire Cecilie the white	Just so was fair Cecilie the white
Ful swift and bisy evere in good werkynge,	Very swift and busy ever in good works,
And round and hool in good perseverynge,	And round and whole in persevering in good (works),
And brennynge evere in charite ful brighte.	And burning ever in very bright charity.
Now have I yow declared what she highte.	Now have I declared to you what she was called.
This mayden bright Cecilie, as hir lif seith,	This bright maiden Cecilie, as her Life says,
Was comen of Romayns and of noble kynde,	Was descended from Romans and of noble birth,
And from hir cradel up fostred in the feith	And from her cradle nurtured up in the faith
Of Crist, and bar his gospel in hir mynde.	Of Christ, and bore his gospel in her mind.
She nevere cessed, as I writen fynde,	She never ceased, as I written find,
Of hir preyere and God to love and drede,	Of her prayer and God to love and dread,
Bisekynge hym to kepe hir maydenhede.	Beseeching him to preserve her virginity.
And whan this mayden sholde unto a man	And when this maiden should unto a man
Ywedded be, that was ful yong of age,	Wedded be, who was very young of age,
Which that ycleped was Valerian,	Who was called Valerian,
And day was comen of hir marriage,	And the day of her marriage was come,
She, ful devout and humble in hir corage,	She, very devout and humble in her spirit,
Under hir robe of gold, that sat ful faire,	Under her robe of gold, that became her very well,
Hadde next hire flessh yclad hire in an haire.	Had next to her flesh clad herself in a hair shirt.
And whil the organs maden melodie,	And while the organs made melody,
To God allone in herte thus sang she:	To God alone in heart thus sang she:
"O Lord, my soule and eek my body gye	"O Lord, my soul and also my body preserve
Unwemmed, lest that I confounded be."	Immaculate, lest that I be damned."
And for his love that dyde upon a tree	And for his love who died upon the cross
Every seconde and thridde day she faste,	Every second and third day she fasted,
Ay biddynge in hire orisons ful faste.	Ever praying in her prayers very earnestly.
The nyght cam, and to bedde moste she gon	The night came, and to bed must she go
With hire housbonde, as ofte is the manere,	With her husband, as often is the manner,
And pryvely to hym she seyde anon,	And privately to him she said at once,
"O sweete and wel biloved spouse deere,	"O sweet and well beloved spouse dear,
Ther is a conseil, and ye wolde it heere,	There is a secret, if you want to hear it,
Which that right fayn I wolde unto yow seye,	Which I am very eager to say to you,
So that ye swere ye shul it nat biwreye."	Providing that you swear you shall not reveal it."
Valerian gan faste unto hire swere	Valerian did earnestly unto her swear
That for no cas ne thyng that myghte be,	That for no occasion nor thing that might be,
He sholde nevere mo biwreyen here;	He should never ever betray her;
And thanne at erst to hym thus seyde she:	And then for the first time to him thus said she:
"I have an aungel which that loveth me,	"I have an angel who loves me,
That with greet love, wher so I wake or sleepe,	Who with great love, whether I wake or sleep,
Is redy ay my body for to kepe.	Is always ready to guard my body.
"And if that he may feelen, out of drede,	"And if he may sense, withoubt doubt,
That ye me touche, or love in vileynye,	That you touch me, or love me lecherously,
He right anon wol sle yow with the dede,	He straightway will slay you in the act,
And in youre yowthe thus ye shullen dye;	And in your youth thus you shall die;
And if that ye in clene love me gye,	And if you preserve me in chaste love,
He wol yow loven as me, for youre clennesse,	He will love you as (he loves) me, for your chastity,
And shewen yow his joye and his brightnesse."	And show you his joy and his brightness."
Valerian, corrected as God wolde,	Valerian, corrected as God would (have it),
Answerde agayn, "If I shal trusten thee,	Answered in reply, "If I must trust thee,
Lat me that aungel se and hym biholde;	Let me see that angel and behold him;
And if that it a verray angel bee,	And if it be a true angel,
Thanne wol I doon as thou hast prayed me;	Then will I do as thou hast prayed me;
And if thou love another man, for sothe	And if thou love another man, in truth
Right with this swerd thanne wol I sle yow bothe."	Then truly with this sword will I slay you both."
Cecile answerde anon-right in this wise:	Cecile answered immediately in this manner:
"If that yow list, the angel shul ye see,	"If you wish, you shall see the angel,
So that ye trowe on Crist and yow baptize.	Provided that you believe in Christ and have yourself baptized.
Gooth forth to Via Apia," quod shee,	Go forth to the Appian Way," said she,
"That fro this toun ne stant but miles three,	"That from this town stands no more than three miles,
And to the povre folkes that ther dwelle,	And to the poor folks that dwell there,
Sey hem right thus, as that I shal yow telle.	Say to them exactly thus, which I shall tell you.
"Telle hem that I, Cecile, yow to hem sente	"Tell them that I, Cecile, sent you to them
To shewen yow the goode Urban the olde,	To show you the good Urban the old,
For secree nedes and for good entente.	For secret needs and for a good purpose.
And whan that ye Seint Urban han biholde,	And when you have beheld Saint Urban,
Telle hym the wordes whiche I to yow tolde;	Tell him the words which I told to you;
And whan that he hath purged yow fro synne,	And when he has cleansed you of sin (by baptism),
Thanne shul ye se that angel, er ye twynne."	Then you shall see that angel, ere you depart."
Valerian is to the place ygon,	Valerian has gone to the place,
And right as hym was taught by his lernynge,	And just as he was taught by his learning (from Cecilie),
He foond this hooly olde Urban anon	He immediately found this holy old Urban
Among the seintes buryeles lotynge.	In hiding among the saints' burial places.
And he anon withouten tariynge	And he immediately without delay
Dide his message; and whan that he it tolde,	Said his message; and when he told it,
Urban for joye his handes gan up holde.	Urban for joy did hold up his hands.
The teeris from his eyen leet he falle.	He let the tears fall from his eyes.
"Almyghty Lord, O Jhesu Crist," quod he,	"Almighty Lord, O Jesus Christ," said he,
"Sower of chaast conseil, hierde of us alle,	"Sower of chaste counsel, shepherd of us all,
The fruyt of thilke seed of chastitee	The fruit of that same seed of chastity
That thou hast sowe in Cecile, taak to thee!	That thou hast sown in Cecile, take to thee!
Lo, lyk a bisy bee, withouten gile,	Lo, like a busy bee, without guile,
Thee serveth ay thyn owene thral Cecile.	Always thine own servant Cecile serves Thee.
"For thilke spouse that she took but now	"For that same spouse that she took just now
Ful lyk a fiers leoun, she sendeth heere,	Very like a fierce lion, she sends here,
As meke as evere was any lomb, to yow!"	As meek as ever was any lamb, to you!"
And with that word anon ther gan appeere	And with that word anon there did appear
An oold man, clad in white clothes cleere,	An old man, clad in clear white clothes,
That hadde a book with lettre of gold in honde,	Who had in hand a book with lettering of gold ,
And gan bifore Valerian to stonde.	And did stand before Valerian.
Valerian as deed fil doun for drede	Valerian as if dead fell down for fear
Whan he hym saugh, and he up hente hym tho,	When he saw him, and the old man picked him up then,
And on his book right thus he gan to rede:	And from his book right thus he began to read:
"O Lord, o feith, o God, withouten mo,	"One Lord, one faith, one God, without more,
O Cristendom, and Fader of alle also,	One baptism, and Father of all also,
Aboven alle and over alle everywhere."	Above all and over all everywhere."
Thise wordes al with gold ywriten were.	These words were written all with gold.
Whan this was rad, thanne seyde this olde man,	When this was read, then said this old man,
"Leevestow this thyng or no? Sey ye or nay."	"Dost thou believe this thing or not? Say yes or no."
"I leeve al this thyng," quod Valerian,	"I believe all this thing," said Valerian,
"For sother thyng than this, I dar wel say,	"For truer thing than this, I dare well say,
Under the hevene no wight thynke may."	No person under the heaven can imagine."
Tho vanysshed this olde man, he nyste where,	Then vanished this old man, he knew not where,
And Pope Urban hym cristned right there.	And Pope Urban christened him right there.
Valerian gooth hoom and fynt Cecilie	Valerian goes home and finds Cecilie
Withinne his chambre with an angel stonde.	Within his room standing with an angel.
This angel hadde of roses and of lilie	This angel had of roses and of lily
Corones two, the which he bar in honde;	Two crowns, which he bore in hand;
And first to Cecile, as I understonde,	And first to Cecile, as I understand,
He yaf that oon, and after gan he take	He gave that one, and after he did give
That oother to Valerian, hir make.	That other to Valerian, her mate.
"With body clene and with unwemmed thoght	"With body clean and with unblemished thought
Kepeth ay wel thise corones," quod he;	Always guard well these crowns," said he;
"Fro paradys to yow have I hem broght,	"From paradise I have brought them to you,
Ne nevere mo ne shal they roten bee,	Nor never ever shall they be rotten,
Ne lese hir soote savour, trusteth me;	Nor lose their sweet fragrance, trust me;
Ne nevere wight shal seen hem with his ye,	Nor never a person shall see them with his eye,
But he be chaast and hate vileynye.	Unless he be chaste and hates villainy.
"And thow, Valerian, for thow so soone	"And thou, Valerian, because thou so soon
Assentedest to good conseil also,	Assented to good counsel also,
Sey what thee list, and thou shalt han thy boone."	Say what pleases thee, and thou shalt have thy request."
"I have a brother," quod Valerian tho,	"I have a brother," said Valerian then,
"That in this world I love no man so.	"And in this world I love no man so much.
I pray yow that my brother may han grace	I pray you that my brother may have grace
To knowe the trouthe, as I do in this place."	To know the truth, as I do in this place."
The angel seyde, "God liketh thy requeste,	The angel said, "God likes thy request,
And bothe with the palm of martirdom	And both (of you) with the palm of martyrdom
Ye shullen come unto his blisful feste."	You shall come unto his blissful feast."
And with that word Tiburce his brother coom.	And with that word Tiburce his brother came.
And whan that he the savour undernoom,	And when he perceived the fragrance,
Which that the roses and the lilies caste,	Which the roses and the lilies cast forth
Withinne his herte he gan to wondre faste,	Within his heart he began to wonder intently,
And seyde, "I wondre, this tyme of the yeer,	And said, "I wonder, this time of the year,
Whennes that soote savour cometh so	Whence that sweet fragrance comes so (much)
Of rose and lilies that I smelle heer.	Of rose and lilies that I smell here.
For though I hadde hem in myne handes two,	For even if I had them in my two hands,
The savour myghte in me no depper go.	The fragrance could go in me no deeper.
The sweete smel that in myn herte I fynde	The sweet smell that in my heart I find
Hath chaunged me al in another kynde."	Has changed me all into another nature."
Valerian seyde: "Two corones han we,	Valerian said: "Two crowns have we,
Snow white and rose reed, that shynen cleere,	Snow white and rose red, that shine clear,
Whiche that thyne eyen han no myght to see;	Which thine eyes have no power to see;
And as thou smellest hem thurgh my preyere,	And as thou smellest them because of my prayer,
So shaltow seen hem, leeve brother deere,	So shalt thou see them, beloved brother dear,
If it so be thou wolt, withouten slouthe,	If it so be thou will, without delaying,
Bileve aright and knowen verray trouthe."	Believe correctly and know real truth."
Tiburce answerde, "Seistow this to me	Tiburce answered, "Sayest thou this to me
In soothnesse, or in dreem I herkne this?"	In actuality, or do I hear this in dream?"
"In dremes," quod Valerian, "han we be	"In dreams," said Valerian, "have we been
Unto this tyme, brother myn, ywis.	Until this time, my brother, indeed.
But now at erst in trouthe oure dwellyng is."	But now for the first time our dwelling is in truth."
"How woostow this?" quod Tiburce, "and in what wyse?"	"How knowest thou this?" said Tiburce, "and in what manner?"
Quod Valerian, "That shal I thee devyse.	Said Valerian, "That I shall tell thee.
"The aungel of God hath me the trouthe ytaught	"The angel of God has taught me the truth
Which thou shalt seen, if that thou wolt reneye	Which thou shalt see, if thou wilt renounce
The ydoles and be clene, and elles naught."	The idols and be chaste, and otherwise nothing (will you see.)"
And of the myracle of thise corones tweye	And of the miracle of these two crowns
Seint Ambrose in his preface list to seye;	Saint Ambrose in his preface is pleased to speak;
Solempnely this noble doctour deere	Solemnly this noble dear Doctor (of the Church)
Commendeth it, and seith in this manere:	Commends it, and says in this manner:
"The palm of martirdom for to receyve,	"In order to receive the palm of martyrdom,
Seinte Cecile, fulfild of Goddes yifte,	Saint Cecile, completely filled with God's gift,
The world and eek hire chambre gan she weyve;	The world and also her bed-chamber did she give up;
Witnesse Tyburces and [Valerians] shrifte,	Witness Tyburce's and Valerian's confession,
To whiche God of his bountee wolde shifte	To which God of his goodness would provide
Corones two of floures wel smellynge,	Two crowns of flowers well smelling,
And made his angel hem the corones brynge.	And made his angel bring them the crowns.
"The mayde hath broght thise men to blisse above;	"The maid has brought these men to bliss above;
The world hath wist what it is worth, certeyn,	The world has known what it is worth, certainly,
Devocioun of chastitee to love."	To love a devotion to chastity."
Tho shewed hym Cecile al open and pleyn	Then Cecile showed him all open and plain
That alle ydoles nys but a thyng in veyn,	That all idols are but meaningless things,
For they been dombe, and therto they been deve,	For they are dumb, and moreover they are deaf,
And charged hym his ydoles for to leve.	And (she) ordered him to leave his idols.
"Whoso that troweth nat this, a beest he is,"	"Whoever believes not this, he is a beast,"
Quod tho Tiburce, "if that I shal nat lye."	Tiburce then said, "if I shall not lie."
And she gan kisse his brest, that herde this,	And she who heard this did kiss his breast,
And was ful glad he koude trouthe espye.	And was very glad he could perceive truth.
"This day I take thee for myn allye,"	"This day I take thee for my kinsman,"
Seyde this blisful faire mayde deere,	Said this blissful fair maid dear,
And after that she seyde as ye may heere:	And after that she said as you may hear:
"Lo, right so as the love of Crist," quod she,	"Lo, exactly as the love of Christ," said she,
"Made me thy brotheres wyf, right in that wise	"Made me thy brother's wife, exactly in that manner
Anon for myn allye heer take I thee,	Right now here I take thee for my kinsman,
Syn that thou wolt thyne ydoles despise.	Since thou will despise thine idols.
Go with thy brother now, and thee baptise,	Go with thy brother now, and get thyself baptized,
And make thee clene, so that thou mowe biholde	And make thyself clean, so that thou can behold
The angels face of which thy brother tolde."	The angel's face of which thy brother told."
Tiburce answerde and seyde, "Brother deere,	Tiburce answered and said, "Brother dear,
First tel me whider I shal, and to what man?"	First tell me where I must go, and to what man?"
"To whom?" quod he, "com forth with right good cheere,	"To whom?" said he, "come forth with right good cheer,
I wol thee lede unto the Pope Urban."	I will lead thee unto the Pope Urban."
"Til Urban? Brother myn Valerian,"	"To Urban? My brother Valerian,"
Quod tho Tiburce, "woltow me thider lede?	Said then Tiburce, "wilt thou lead me there?
Me thynketh that it were a wonder dede.	It seems to me that it would be a wonderful deed.
"Ne menestow nat Urban," quod he tho,	"Thou meanest not Urban," said he then,
"That is so ofte dampned to be deed,	"That is so often condemned to be dead,
And woneth in halkes alwey to and fro,	And dwells in hiding places always (going) from one to another,
And dar nat ones putte forth his heed?	And dares not once put forth his head?
Men sholde hym brennen in a fyr so reed	Men should burn him in a fire so red
If he were founde, or that men myghte hym spye,	If he were found, or if men could catch sight of him,
And we also, to bere hym compaignye;	And we too (would burn), to bear him company;
"And whil we seken thilke divinitee	"And while we seek that same divinity
That is yhid in hevene pryvely,	That is hidden secretly in heaven,
Algate ybrend in this world shul we be!"	Nevertheless we shall be burned in this world!"
To whom Cecile answerde boldely,	To whom Cecile answered boldly,
"Men myghten dreden wel and skilfully	"Men might well and reasonably fear
This lyf to lese, myn owene deere brother,	To lose this life, my own dear brother,
If this were lyvynge oonly and noon oother.	If this were the only life and (there were) none other.
"But ther is bettre lif in oother place,	"But there is a better life in another place,
That nevere shal be lost, ne drede thee noght,	That never shall be lost, doubt thee not,
Which Goddes Sone us tolde thurgh his grace.	Which God's Son told us by means of his grace.
That Fadres Sone hath alle thyng ywroght,	That Father's Son has created all things,
And al that wroght is with a skilful thoght;	And all that is created (and endowed) with the power of reason;
The Goost, that fro the Fader gan procede,	The Holy Ghost, who from the Father did proceed,
Hath sowled hem, withouten any drede.	Has given them souls, without any doubt.
"By word and by myracle heigh Goddes Sone,	"By word and by miracle high God's Son,
Whan he was in this world, declared heere	When he was in this world, declared here
That ther was oother lyf ther men may wone."	That there was another life where men may dwell."
To whom answerde Tiburce, "O suster deere,	To whom answered Tiburce, "O sister dear,
Ne seydestow right now in this manere,	Said thou not just now in this manner,
Ther nys but o God, lord in soothfastnesse?	There is but one God, lord in truthfulness?
And now of three how maystow bere witnesse?"	And now of three how canst thou bear witness?"
"That shal I telle," quod she, "er I go.	"That shall I tell," said she, "ere I go.
Right as a man hath sapiences three --	Exactly as a man has three mental faculties --
Memorie, engyn, and intellect also --	Memory, imagination, and judgement also --
So in o beynge of divinitee,	So in one being of divinity,
Thre persones may ther right wel bee."	Three persons may right well be there."
Tho gan she hym ful bisily to preche	Then very zealously she did preach to him
Of Cristes come, and of his peynes teche,	Of Christ's coming, and teach (him) of His pains,
And manye pointes of his passioun;	And many particulars of His passion;
How Goddes Sone in this world was withholde	How God's Son was compelled to remain in this world
To doon mankynde pleyn remissioun,	To provide full forgiveness for mankind,
That was ybounde in synne and cares colde;	Which was bound in sin and painful cares;
Al this thyng she unto Tiburce tolde.	All this thing she told unto Tiburce.
And after this Tiburce in good entente	And after this Tiburce with a good will
With Valerian to Pope Urban he wente,	With Valerian he went to Pope Urban,
That thanked God, and with glad herte and light	Who thanked God, and with glad and happy heart
He cristned hym and made hym in that place	He christened him and made him in that place
Parfit in his lernynge, Goddes knyght.	Perfect in his learning, God's knight.
And after this Tiburce gat swich grace	And after this Tiburce got such grace
That every day he saugh in tyme and space	That every day in real time and space he saw
The aungel of God; and every maner boone	The angel of God; and every manner of gift
That he God axed, it was sped ful soone.	That he asked of God was provided immediately.
It were ful hard by ordre for to seyn	It would be very hard in proper sequence to say
How manye wondres Jhesus for hem wroghte;	How many wonders Jesus made for them;
But atte laste, to tellen short and pleyn,	But at the last, to tell short and plain,
The sergeantz of the toun of Rome hem soghte,	The officers of the law of the town of Rome sought them,
And hem biforn Almache, the prefect, broghte,	And brought them before Almache, the prefect,
Which hem apposed, and knew al hire entente,	Who questioned them, and knew all their thought,
And to the ymage of Juppiter hem sente,	And sent them to the image of Jupiter,
And seyde, "Whoso wol nat sacrifise,	And said, "Whoever will not sacrifice,
Swape of his heed; this my sentence heer."	Strike off his head; this is my sentence here."
Anon thise martirs that I yow devyse,	Immediately these martyrs of whom I tell you,
Oon Maximus, that was an officer	One Maximus, that was an officer
Of the prefectes, and his corniculer,	Of the prefect's, and his chief assistant,
Hem hente, and whan he forth the seintes ladde,	Seized them, and when he led forth the saints,
Hymself he weep for pitee that he hadde.	He himself wept for pity that he had.
Whan Maximus had herd the seintes loore,	When Maximus had heard the saints' teaching,
He gat hym of the tormentoures leve,	He got himself permission of the executioners,
And ladde hem to his hous withoute moore,	And led them to his house without more delay,
And with hir prechyng, er that it were eve,	And with their preaching, ere that it was evening,
They gonnen fro the tormentours to reve,	They did take away from the executioners,
And fro Maxime, and fro his folk echone,	And from Maxime, and from his folk each one of them,
The false feith, to trowe in God allone.	The false faith, (and brought them) to believe in God alone.
Cecile cam, whan it was woxen nyght,	Cecile came, when it was grown night,
With preestes that hem cristned alle yfeere;	With priests who christened them all together;
And afterward, whan day was woxen light,	And afterward, when day was grown light,
Cecile hem seyde with a ful stedefast cheere,	Cecile said to them with a full steadfast countenance,
"Now, Cristes owene knyghtes leeve and deere,	"Now, Christ's own knights beloved and dear,
Cast alle awey the werkes of derknesse,	Cast away all the works of darkness,
And armeth yow in armure of brightnesse.	And arm yourselves in armor of brightness.
"Ye han for sothe ydoon a greet bataille,	"You have truly done a great battle,
Youre cours is doon, youre feith han ye conserved.	Your race is done, your faith you have maintained.
Gooth to the corone of lif that may nat faille;	Go to the crown of life that can not fail;
The rightful Juge, which that ye han served,	The rightful Judge, whom you have served,
Shal yeve it yow, as ye han it deserved."	Shall give it to you, as you have deserved it."
And whan this thyng was seyd as I devyse,	And when this thing was said as I tell,
Men ledde hem forth to doon the sacrefise.	Men led them forth to do the sacrifice.
But whan they weren to the place broght	But when they were brought to the place
To tellen shortly the conclusioun,	To tell shortly the conclusion,
They nolde encense ne sacrifise right noght,	They would not incense nor sacrifice in any way,
But on hir knees they setten hem adoun	But on their knees they set themselves down
With humble herte and sad devocioun,	With humble heart and steadfast devotion,
And losten bothe hir hevedes in the place.	And lost both their heads in the place.
Hir soules wenten to the Kyng of grace.	Their souls went to the King of grace.
This Maximus, that saugh this thyng bityde,	This Maximus, who saw this thing happen,
With pitous teeris tolde it anonright,	With piteous tears told it right away,
That he hir soules saugh to hevene glyde	That he saw their souls glide to heaven
With aungels ful of cleernesse and of light,	With angels full of clearness and of light,
And with his word converted many a wight;	And with his word converted many a person;
For which Almachius dide hym so bete	For which Almachius had him so beaten
With whippe of leed til he his lif gan lete.	With whip tipped with lead that he left his life.
Cecile hym took and buryed hym anon	Cecile took him and buried him straightway
By Tiburce and Valerian softely	By Tiburce and Valerian tenderly
Withinne hire buriyng place, under the stoon;	Within their burying place, under the tombstone;
And after this, Almachius hastily	And after this, Almachius hastily
Bad his ministres fecchen openly	Ordered his ministers to fetch publicly
Cecile, so that she myghte in his presence	Cecile, so that she might in his presence
Doon sacrifice and Juppiter encense.	Do sacrifice and burn incense to Jupiter.
But they, converted at hir wise loore,	But they, converted by her wise teaching,
Wepten ful soore, and yaven ful credence	Wept very bitterly, and gave full credence
Unto hire word, and cryden moore and moore,	Unto her word, and cried more and more,
"Crist, Goddes Sone, withouten difference,	"Christ, God's Son, without difference [between Father and Son],
Is verray God -- this is al oure sentence --	Is true God -- this is the belief of us all --
That hath so good a servant hym to serve.	That has so good a servant to serve Him.
This with o voys we trowen, thogh we sterve!"	This unanimously we believe, even if we should die!"
Almachius, that herde of this doynge,	Almachius, that heard of this business,
Bad fecchen Cecile, that he myghte hire see,	Ordered (his men to) fetch Cecile, so that he might see her
And alderfirst, lo, this was his axynge.	And first of all, lo, this was his quesation.
"What maner womman artow?" tho quod he.	"What sort of woman art thou?" then said he.
"I am a gentil womman born," quod she.	"I am a gentle woman born," said she.
"I axe thee," quod he, "though it thee greeve,	"I ask thee," said he, "though it may grieve thee,
Of thy religioun and of thy bileeve."	About thy religion and about thy belief."
"Ye han bigonne youre questioun folily,"	"You have begun your question foolishly,"
Quod she, "that wolden two answeres conclude	Said she, "you who would include two answers
In o demande; ye axed lewedly."	In one question; you asked ignorantly."
Almache answerde unto that similitude,	Almache answered unto that refutation,
"Of whennes comth thyn answeryng so rude?"	"Of whence comes thine answering so rude?"
"Of whennes?" quod she, whan that she was freyned,	"Of whence?" said she, when she was asked,
"Of conscience and of good feith unfeyned."	"Of conscience and of sincere good faith."
Almachius seyde, "Ne takestow noon heede	Almachius said, "Takest thou no heed
Of my power?" And she answerde hym this:	Of my power?" And she answered him this:
"Youre myght," quod she, "ful litel is to dreede,	"Your might," said she, "is very little to fear,
For every mortal mannes power nys	For every mortal man's power is nothing
But lyk a bladdre ful of wynd, ywys.	But only like a bladder full of wind, indeed.
For with a nedles poynt, whan it is blowe,	For with a needle's point, when it is blown up,
May al the boost of it be leyd ful lowe."	Can all the arrogance of it be laid full low."
"Ful wrongfully bigonne thow," quod he,	"Full wrongfully thou began," said he,
"And yet in wrong is thy perseveraunce.	"And yet wrongful is thy perseverance.
Wostow nat how oure myghty princes free	Dost thou not know how our mighty noble princes
Han thus comanded and maad ordinaunce	Have thus commanded and made a law
That every Cristen wight shal han penaunce	That every Christian person shall be punished
But if that he his Cristendom withseye,	Unless he renounce his Christian faith,
And goon al quit, if he wole it reneye?"	And go all free, if he will deny it?"
"Yowre princes erren, as youre nobleye dooth,"	"Your princes err, as your nobles do,"
Quod tho Cecile, "and with a wood sentence	Said then Cecile, "and with a crazy verdict
Ye make us gilty, and it is nat sooth.	You make us guilty, and it is not true.
For ye, that knowen wel oure innocence,	For you, who know well our innocence,
For as muche as we doon a reverence	Forasmuch as we do reverence
To Crist, and for we bere a Cristen name,	To Christ, and because we bear a Christian name,
Ye putte on us a cryme and eek a blame.	You accuse us of a crime and also (put on us) the blame for it.
"But we that knowen thilke name so	"But we who know that same name
For vertuous, we may it nat withseye."	To be so virtuous, we can not deny it."
Almache answerde, "Chees oon of thise two:	Almache answered, "Chose one of these two:
Do sacrifice, or Cristendom reneye,	Do sacrifice, or renounce Christendom,
That thou mowe now escapen by that weye."	So that thou can now escape by that means."
At which the hooly blisful faire mayde	At which the holy blissful fair maid
Gan for to laughe, and to the juge sayde:	Began to laugh, and to the judge said:
"O juge, confus in thy nycetee,	"O judge, confused in thy folly,
Woltow that I reneye innocence,	Wilt thou that I renounce innocence,
To make me a wikked wight?" quod shee.	To make myself a wicked person?" said she.
"Lo, he dissymuleth heere in audience;	"Lo, he hides his true feelings here in open court;
He stareth, and woodeth in his advertence!"	He stares, and goes mad in his mind!"
To whom Almachius, "Unsely wrecche,	To whom Almachius, "Miserable wretch,
Ne woostow nat how fer my myght may strecche?	Knowest thou not how far my power can stretch?
"Han noght oure myghty princes to me yiven,	"Have not our mighty princes to me given,
Ye, bothe power and auctoritee	Yea, both power and authority
To maken folk to dyen or to lyven?	To make folk to die or to live?
Why spekestow so proudly thanne to me?"	Why speakest thou so proudly then to me?"
"I speke noght but stedfastly," quod she;	"I speak only faithfully," said she;
"Nat proudly, for I seye, as for my syde,	"Not proudly, for I say, as for my side,
We haten deedly thilke vice of pryde.	We hate that same deadly sin of pride.
"And if thou drede nat a sooth to heere,	"And if thou dread not to hear a truth,
Thanne wol I shewe al openly, by right,	Then will I show all openly, according to law,
That thou hast maad a ful gret lesyng heere.	That thou hast made a very great lie here.
Thou seyst thy princes han thee yeven myght	Thou sayest thy princes have given thee power
Bothe for to sleen and for to quyken a wight;	Both to slay and to give life to a person;
Thou, that ne mayst but oonly lyf bireve,	Thou, who can only take away life,
Thou hast noon oother power ne no leve.	Thou hast no other power nor any authority.
"But thou mayst seyn thy princes han thee maked	"But thou can say thy princes have made thee
Ministre of deeth; for if thou speke of mo,	Minister of death; for if thou speak of more,
Thou lyest, for thy power is ful naked."	Thou liest, for thy power is strictly limited.
"Do wey thy booldnesse," seyde Almachius tho,	"Do away thy boldness," said Almachius then,
"And sacrifice to oure goddes er thou go!	"And sacrifice to our gods ere thou go!
I recche nat what wrong that thou me profre,	I care not what wrong that thou may express to me,
For I kan suffre it as a philosophre;	For I can suffer it as a philosopher;
"But thilke wronges may I nat endure	"But those same wrongs I can not endure
That thou spekest of oure goddes heere," quod he.	Which thou spekest of our gods here," said he.
Cecile answerde, "O nyce creature!	Cecile answered, "O foolish creature!
Thou seydest no word syn thou spak to me	Thou saidest no word since thou spoke to me
That I ne knew therwith thy nycetee	That I did not know therewith thy foolishness
And that thou were in every maner wise	And that thou were in every sort of way
A lewed officer and a veyn justise.	An ignorant officer and a foolish judge.
"Ther lakketh no thyng to thyne outter yen	"There lacks nothing to thine outer eyes
That thou n' art blynd; for thyng that we seen alle	Except that thou art blind; for thing that we all see
That it is stoon -- that men may wel espyen --	That it is stone -- that men can well see --
That ilke stoon a god thow wolt it calle.	That same stone a god thou wilt call it.
I rede thee, lat thyn hand upon it falle	I advise thee, let thine hand upon it fall
And taste it wel, and stoon thou shalt it fynde,	And taste it well, and stone thou shalt find it,
Syn that thou seest nat with thyne eyen blynde.	Since thou seest not with thy blind eyes.
"It is a shame that the peple shal	"It is a shame that the people shall
So scorne thee and laughe at thy folye,	So scorn thee and laugh at thy folly,
For communly men woot it wel overal	For without exception men know it well everywhere
That myghty God is in his hevenes hye;	That mighty God is in his high heavens;
And thise ymages, wel thou mayst espye,	And these images, thou canst well see,
To thee ne to hemself mowen noght profite,	Can do no profit to thee nor to themselves,
For in effect they been nat worth a myte."	For in fact they are not worth a penny."
Thise wordes and swiche othere seyde she,	These words and others such said she,
And he weex wroth, and bad men sholde hir lede	And he grew angry, and ordered that men should lead her
Hom til hir hous, and "In hire hous," quod he,	Home to her house, and "In her house," said he,
"Brenne hire right in a bath of flambes rede."	"Burn her right in a bath of red flames."
And as he bad, right so was doon the dede;	And as he ordered, exactly so the deed was done;
For in a bath they gonne hire faste shetten,	For they did shut her fast in a cauldron,
And nyght and day greet fyr they under betten.	And night and day they fed great fire under it.
The longe nyght, and eek a day also,	The long night, and also a day as well,
For al the fyr and eek the bathes heete	Despite the fire and also the bath's heat
She sat al coold and feelede no wo.	She sat all cool and felt no pain.
It made hire nat a drope for to sweete.	It made her not a drop to sweat.
But in that bath hir lyf she moste lete,	But in that bath her life she must leave,
For he Almachius, with ful wikke entente,	For that Almachius, with completely wicked intent,
To sleen hire in the bath his sonde sente.	Sent his messenger to slay her in the bath.
Thre strokes in the nekke he smoot hire tho,	Three strokes in the neck he smote her then,
The tormentour, but for no maner chaunce	The executioner, but in no sort of way
He myghte noght smyte al hir nekke atwo;	He could not smite all her neck in two;
And for ther was that tyme an ordinaunce	And because there was that time an ordinance
That no man sholde doon man swich penaunce	That no man should do any one such pain
The ferthe strook to smyten, softe or soore,	The fourth stroke to smite, soft or sore,
This tormentour ne dorste do namoore,	This executioner dared not do any more,
But half deed, with hir nekke ycorven there,	But half dead, with her neck carved there,
He lefte hir lye, and on his wey he went.	He left her lie, and on his way he went.
The Cristen folk, which that aboute hire were,	The Christian folk, who were about her,
With sheetes han the blood ful faire yhent.	With sheets have very carefully taken up the blood.
Thre dayes lyved she in this torment,	Three days she lived in this torment,
And nevere cessed hem the feith to teche	And never ceased to teach them the faith
That she hadde fostred; hem she gan to preche,	That she had fostered; to them she did preach,
And hem she yaf hir moebles and hir thyng,	And she gave them her personal property and her things,
And to the Pope Urban bitook hem tho,	And to the Pope Urban (she) entrusted them then,
And seyde, "I axed this of hevene kyng,	And said, "I asked this of heaven's king,
To han respit thre dayes and namo	To have respite three days and no more
To recomende to yow, er that I go,	To commend to you, ere I go,
Thise soules, lo, and that I myghte do werche	These souls, lo, and that I might have made
Heere of myn hous perpetuelly a cherche."	Here of my house perpetually a church."
Seint Urban with his deknes prively	Saint Urban with his deacons secretly
The body fette and buryed it by nyghte	Fetched the body and buried it by night
Among his othere seintes honestly.	Among his other saints decently.
Hir hous the chirche of Seint Cecilie highte;	Her house is called the church of Saint Cecilie;
Seint Urban halwed it, as he wel myghte;	Saint Urban consecrated it, as he well could;
In which, into this day, in noble wyse,	In which, unto this day, in noble manner,
Men doon to Crist and to his seint servyse.	People do service to Christ and to his saint.
The Prologe of the Somonours Tale.	The Prologue of the Summoner's Tale
This Somonour in his styropes hye stood;	This Summoner in his stirrups stood high;
Upon this Frere his herte was so wood	Upon this Friar his heart was so enraged
That lyk an aspen leef he quook for ire.	That like an aspen leaf he quaked for ire.
"Lordynges," quod he, "but o thyng I desire;	"Gentlemen," said he, "but one thing I desire;
I yow biseke that, of youre curteisye,	I you beseech that, of your courtesy,
Syn ye han herd this false Frere lye,	Since you have heard this false Friar lie,
As suffreth me I may my tale telle.	Now grant me that me I may tell my tale.
This Frere bosteth that he knoweth helle,	This Friar boasts that he knows hell,
And God it woot, that it is litel wonder;	And God knows it, that it is little wonder;
Freres and feendes been but lyte asonder.	Friars and fiends are but little different.
For, pardee, ye han ofte tyme herd telle	For, by God, you have often times heard tell
How that a frere ravysshed was to helle	How a friar was carried off to hell
In spirit ones by a visioun;	In spirit once by a vision;
And as an angel ladde hym up and doun,	And as an angel led him up and down,
To shewen hym the peynes that ther were,	To show him the pains that were there,
In al the place saugh he nat a frere;	In all the place saw he not a friar;
Of oother folk he saugh ynowe in wo.	Of other folk he saw enough in woe.
Unto this angel spak the frere tho:	Unto this angel spoke the friar then:
`Now, sire,' quod he, `han freres swich a grace	`Now, sir,' said he, `have friars such a grace
That noon of hem shal come to this place?'	That none of them shall come to this place?'
`Yis' quod this angel, `many a millioun!'	`Yes' said this angel, `many a million!'
And unto Sathanas he ladde hym doun.	And unto Satan he led him down.
`And now hath Sathanas,' seith he, `a tayl	`And now has Satan,' says he, `a tail
Brodder than of a carryk is the sayl.	Broader than of a large galleon is the sail.
Hold up thy tayl, thou Sathanas!' quod he;	Hold up thy tail, thou Satan!' said he;
`Shewe forth thyn ers, and lat the frere se	`Show forth thy ass, and let the friar see
Where is the nest of freres in this place!'	Where the nest of friars is in this place!'
And er that half a furlong wey of space,	And before half a furlong way of time (a few minutes),
Right so as bees out swarmen from an hyve,	Just as bees swarm out from a hive,
Out of the develes ers ther gonne dryve	Out of the devil's ass there began to rush
Twenty thousand freres on a route,	Twenty thousand friars in a crowd,
And thurghout helle swarmed al aboute,	And throughout hell swarmed all about,
And comen agayn as faste as they may gon,	And came back again as fast as they can go,
And in his ers they crepten everychon.	And in his ass they crept every one.
He clapte his tayl agayn and lay ful stille.	He clapped his tail again and lay very still.
This frere, whan he looked hadde his fille	This friar, when he had looked his fill
Upon the tormentz of this sory place,	Upon the torments of this sorry place,
His spirit God restored, of his grace,	His spirit God restored, by his grace,
Unto his body agayn, and he awook.	Unto his body again, and he awoke.
But natheles, for fere yet he quook,	But nonetheless, for fear yet he quaked,
So was the develes ers ay in his mynde,	So was the devil's ass always in his mind,
That is his heritage of verray kynde.	That is his true natural heritage.
God save yow alle, save this cursed Frere!	God save you all, except this cursed Friar!
My prologe wol I ende in this manere."	My prologue will I end in this manner."
Heere bigynneth the Somonour his Tale.	Here begins the Summoner's Tale.
Lordynges, ther is in Yorkshire, as I gesse,	Gentlemen, there is in Yorkshire, as I believe,
A mersshy contree called Holdernesse,	A marshy country called Holdernesse,
In which ther wente a lymytour aboute	In which there went a licensed beggar about
To preche, and eek to begge, it is no doute.	To preach, and also to beg, it is no doubt.
And so bifel that on a day this frere	And so befell that on a day this friar
Hadde preched at a chirche in his manere,	Had preached at a church in his manner,
And specially, aboven every thyng,	And specially, above every thing,
Excited he the peple in his prechyng	Excited he the people in his preaching
To trentals, and to yeve, for Goddes sake,	To masses for dead souls, and to give, for God's sake,
Wherwith men myghte hooly houses make,	The wherewithal that men might holy houses make,
Ther as divine servyce is honoured,	Where divine service is honored,
Nat ther as it is wasted and devoured,	Not where it is wasted and devoured,
Ne ther it nedeth nat for to be yive,	Nor where it needs not to be given,
As to possessioners, that mowen lyve,	As to beneficed clergymen, that may live,
Thanked be God, in wele and habundaunce.	Thanked be God, in prosperity and abundance.
"Trentals," seyde he, "deliveren fro penaunce	"Masses for souls," said he, "deliver from penance
Hir freendes soules, as wel olde as yonge --	Their friends' souls, as well old as young --
Ye, whan that they been hastily ysonge,	Yes, when they are hastily sung,
Nat for to holde a preest joly and gay --	Not to keep a priest jolly and gay --
He syngeth nat but o masse in a day.	He sings not but one masse in a day.
Delivereth out," quod he, "anon the soules!	Deliver out," said he, "immediately the souls!
Ful hard it is with flesshhook or with oules	Very hard it is with flesh hook or with awls
To been yclawed, or to brenne or bake.	To be clawed, or to burn or bake.
Now spede yow hastily, for Cristes sake!"	Now speed you hastily, for Christ's sake!"
And whan this frere had seyd al his entente,	And when this friar had said all he intended,
With qui cum patre forth his wey he wente.	With the prayer "who with the father" forth he went his way.
Whan folk in chirche had yeve him what hem leste,	When folk in church had given him what they wished,
He wente his wey; no lenger wolde he reste.	He went his way; no longer would he stay.
With scrippe and tipped staf, ytukked hye,	With satchel and metal-tipped staff, his robe tucked up high,
In every hous he gan to poure and prye,	In every house he began to peer and pry,
And beggeth mele and chese, or elles corn.	And begs meal and cheese, or else grain.
His felawe hadde a staf tipped with horn,	His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,
A peyre of tables al of yvory,	A pair of tablets all of ivory,
And a poyntel polysshed fetisly,	And a writing instrument polished carefully,
And wroot the names alwey, as he stood,	And wrote the names always, as he stood,
Of alle folk that yaf hym any good,	Of all folk that gave him any good thing,
Ascaunces that he wolde for hem preye.	As if he would for them pray.
"Yif us a busshel whete, malt, or reye,	"Give us a bushel of wheat, malt, or rye,
A Goddes kechyl, or a trype of chese,	A little cake, or a bit of cheese,
Or elles what yow lyst, we may nat cheese;	Or else what you like, we may not choose;
A Goddes halfpeny, or a masse peny,	A God's halfpenny, or a mass penny,
Or yif us of youre brawn, if ye have eny;	Or give us some of your meat, if you have any;
A dagon of youre blanket, leeve dame,	A piece of your woolen cloth, dear lady,
Oure suster deere -- lo! Heere I write youre name --	Our sister dear -- lo! Here I write your name --
Bacon or beef, or swich thyng as ye fynde."	Bacon or beef, or such thing as you find."
A sturdy harlot wente ay hem bihynde,	A sturdy rascal went always behind them,
That was hir hostes man, and bar a sak,	Who was their host's man, and bore a sack,
And what men yaf hem, leyde it on his bak.	And what men gave them, laid it on his back.
And whan that he was out at dore, anon	And when he was out at door, immediately
He planed awey the names everichon	He planed away the names every one
That he biforn had writen in his tables;	That he before had written in his tables;
He served hem with nyfles and with fables.	He served them with tricks and with falsehoods.
"Nay, ther thou lixt, thou Somonour!" quod the Frere.	"Nay, there thou lie, thou Summoner!" said the Friar.
"Pees," quod oure Hoost, "for Cristes mooder deere!	"Quiet," said our Host, "for Christ's mother dear!
Tel forth thy tale, and spare it nat at al."	Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at al."
"So thryve I," quod this Somonour, "so I shal!"	"As I may thrive," said this Summoner, "so I shall!"
So longe he wente, hous by hous, til he	So long he went, house by house, until he
Cam til an hous ther he was wont to be	Came to a house where he was accustomed to be
Refresshed moore than in an hundred placis.	Hospitably received more than in a hundred places.
Syk lay the goode man whos that the place is;	Sick lay the good man whose the place is;
Bedrede upon a couche lowe he lay.	Bedridden upon a couch low he lay.
"Deus hic!" quod he, "O Thomas, freend, good day!"	"God be here!" said he, "Oh Thomas, friend, good day!"
Seyde this frere, curteisly and softe.	Said this friar, courteously and soft.
"Thomas," quod he, "God yelde yow! Ful ofte	"Thomas," said he, "God reward you! Very often
Have I upon this bench faren ful weel;	Have I upon this bench fared full well;
Heere have I eten many a myrie meel."	Here have I eaten many a merry meal."
And fro the bench he droof awey the cat,	And from the bench he drove away the cat,
And leyde adoun his potente and his hat,	And laid down his walking stick and his hat,
And eek his scrippe, and sette hym softe adoun.	And also his satchel, and set him softly down.
His felawe was go walked into toun	His fellow had gone walking into town
Forth with his knave, into that hostelrye	Forth with his knave, into that hostelry
Where as he shoop hym thilke nyght to lye.	Where he intended that night to lie.
"O deere maister," quod this sike man,	"Oh dear master," said this sick man,
"How han ye fare sith that March bigan?	"How have you fared since March began?
I saugh yow noght this fourtenyght or moore."	I saw you not this fortnight or more."
"God woot," quod he, "laboured I have ful soore,	"God knows," said he, "labored I have very hard,
And specially for thy savacion	And especially for thy salvation
Have I seyd many a precious orison,	Have I said many a precious prayer,
And for oure othere freendes, God hem blesse!	And for our other friends, God them bless!
I have to day been at youre chirche at messe,	I have today been at your church at mass,
And seyd a sermon after my symple wit --	And said a sermon insofar as my simple wit allowed --
Nat al after the text of hooly writ,	Not entirely according to the text of holy writ,
For it is hard to yow, as I suppose,	For it is hard for you, as I suppose,
And therfore wol I teche yow al the glose.	And therefore will I teach you all the interpretation.
Glosynge is a glorious thyng, certeyn,	Interpreting scripture is a glorious thing, certainly,
For lettre sleeth, so as we clerkes seyn --	For letter slays, so we clerks say --
There have I taught hem to be charitable,	There have I taught them to be charitable,
And spende hir good ther it is resonable;	And spend their goods where it is reasonable;
And there I saugh oure dame -- A! Where is she?"	And there I saw our lady -- Ah! Where is she?"
"Yond in the yerd I trowe that she be,"	"Yonder in the yard I believe that she be,"
Seyde this man, "and she wol come anon."	Said this man, "and she will come anon."
"Ey, maister, welcome be ye, by Seint John!"	"Ey, master, welcome are you, by Saint John!"
Seyde this wyf, "How fare ye, hertely?"	Said this wife, "How fare you, cordially (I ask)?"
The frere ariseth up ful curteisly,	The friar arises up full courteously,
And hire embraceth in his armes narwe,	And her embraces in his arms tightly,
And kiste hire sweete, and chirketh as a sparwe	And kissed her sweetly, and chirps like a sparrow
With his lyppes: "Dame," quod he, "right weel,	With his lips: "Lady," said he, "right well,
As he that is youre servant every deel,	As he who is your servant every bit,
Thanked be God, that yow yaf soule and lyf!	Thanked be God, who gave you soul and life!
Yet saugh I nat this day so fair a wyf	Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife
In al the chirche, God so save me!"	In all the church, as God may save me!"
"Ye, God amende defautes, sire," quod she.	"Yes, God correct my faults, sir," said she.
"Algates, welcome be ye, by my fey!"	"At any rate, welcome are you, by my faith!"
"Graunt mercy, dame, this have I founde alwey.	"Great thanks, lady, this have I found always.
But of youre grete goodnesse, by youre leve,	But of your great goodness, by your leave,
I wolde prey yow that ye nat yow greve,	I would pray you that you be not annoyed,
I wole with Thomas speke a litel throwe.	I will with Thomas speak a little while.
Thise curatz been ful necligent and slowe	These curates are very negligent and slow
To grope tendrely a conscience	To examine gently a conscience
In shrift; in prechyng is my diligence,	In confession; in preaching is my diligence,
And studie in Petres wordes and in Poules.	And study in Peter's words and in Paul's.
I walke and fisshe Cristen mennes soules	I walk and fish Christian men's souls
To yelden Jhesu Crist his propre rente;	To pay Jesus Christ his proper income;
To sprede his word is set al myn entente."	To spread his word is set all my intention."
"Now, by youre leve, o deere sire," quod she,	"Now, by your leave, oh dear sir," said she,
"Chideth him weel, for seinte Trinitee!	"Chide him well, for the Holy Trinity!
He is as angry as a pissemyre,	He is as angry as a pismire,
Though that he have al that he kan desire;	Though he have all that he can desire;
Though I hym wrye a-nyght and make hym warm,	Though I cover him at night and make him warm,
And over hym leye my leg outher myn arm,	And over him lay my leg or my arm,
He groneth lyk oure boor, lith in oure sty.	He groans like our boor, that lies in our sty.
Oother desport right noon of hym have I;	Other pleasure right none of him have I;
I may nat plese hym in no maner cas."	I can not please him in any sort of way."
"O Thomas, je vous dy, Thomas! Thomas!	"Oh Thomas, I tell you, Thomas! Thomas!
This maketh the feend; this moste ben amended.	This makes the fiend; this must be amended.
Ire is a thyng that hye God defended,	Ire is a thing that high God forbad,
And therof wol I speke a word or two."	And thereof will I speak a word or two."
"Now, maister," quod the wyf, "er that I go,	"Now, master," said the wife, "before I go,
What wol ye dyne? I wol go theraboute."	What will you dine? I will go work on that."
"Now, dame," quod he, "now je vous dy sanz doute,	"Now, lady," said he, "now I tell you without doubt
Have I nat of a capon but the lyvere,	Have I of a capon only the liver,
And of youre softe breed nat but a shyvere,	And of your soft breed nothing but a sliver,
And after that a rosted pigges heed --	And after that a roasted pig's head --
But that I nolde no beest for me were deed --	But that I would that no beast for me were dead --
Thanne hadde I with yow hoomly suffisaunce.	Then had I with you enough plain food.
I am a man of litel sustenaunce;	I am a man who needs little sustenance;
My spirit hath his fostryng in the Bible.	My spirit has its nourishment in the Bible.
The body is ay so redy and penyble	The body is always so ready and accustomed
To wake, that my stomak is destroyed.	To staying awake (to pray), that my stomach is destroyed.
I prey yow, dame, ye be nat anoyed,	I pray you, lady, that you be not annoyed,
Though I so freendly yow my conseil shewe.	Though I so friendly show you my private affairs.
By God! I wolde nat telle it but a fewe."	By God! I would not tell it but to a few."
"Now, sire," quod she, "but o word er I go.	"Now, sir," said she, "but one word before I go.
My child is deed withinne thise wykes two,	My child is dead within these weeks two,
Soone after that ye wente out of this toun."	Soon after you went out of this town."
"His deeth saugh I by revelacioun,"	"His death saw I by revelation,"
Seide this frere, "at hoom in oure dortour.	Said this friar, "at home in our dormitory.
I dar wel seyn that, er that half an hour	I dare well say that, before half an hour
After his deeth, I saugh hym born to blisse	After his death, I saw him carried up to bliss
In myn avision, so God me wisse!	In my vision, as God may guide me!
So dide oure sexteyn and oure fermerer,	So did our sacristan and the head of our infirmary,
That han been trewe freres fifty yeer;	That have been true friars fifty years;
They may now -- God be thanked of his loone! --	They may now -- God be thanked of his grace! --
Maken hir jubilee and walke allone.	Make their fiftieth anniversary and walk alone.
And up I roos, and al oure covent eke,	And up I rose, and all our convent as well,
With many a teere trillyng on my cheke,	With many a tear tricking on my cheek,
Withouten noyse or claterynge of belles;	Without noise or clattering of bells;
Te Deum was oure song, and nothyng elles,	Te Deum was our song, and nothing else,
Save that to Crist I seyde an orison,	Except that to Christ I said a prayer,
Thankynge hym of his revelacion.	Thanking him for his revelation.
For, sire and dame, trusteth me right weel,	For, sir and lady, trust me right well,
Oure orisons been moore effectueel,	Our prayers are more effectual,
And moore we seen of Cristes secree thynges,	And more we see of Christ's secret things,
Than burel folk, although they weren kynges.	Than secular folk, although they were kings.
We lyve in poverte and in abstinence,	We live in poverty and in abstinence,
And burell folk in richesse and despence	And secular folk in riches and expenditures
Of mete and drynke, and in hir foul delit.	Of food and drink, and in their foul delight.
We han this worldes lust al in despit.	We hold this world's lust all in scorn.
Lazar and Dives lyveden diversly,	Lazar and Dives lived diversely,
And divers gerdon hadden they therby.	And diverse rewards had they thereby.
Whoso wol preye, he moot faste and be clene,	Whoever will pray, he must fast and be pure,
And fatte his soule, and make his body lene.	And fatten his soul, and make his body lean.
We fare as seith th' apostle; clooth and foode	We fare as says the apostle; cloth and food
Suffisen us, though they be nat ful goode.	Suffice us, though they are not full good.
The clennesse and the fastynge of us freres	The purity and the fasting of us friars
Maketh that Crist accepteth oure preyeres.	Makes that Christ accepts our prayers.
"Lo, Moyses fourty dayes and fourty nyght	"Lo, Moses forty days and forty nights
Fasted, er that the heighe God of myght	Fasted, before the high God of might
Spak with hym in the mountayne of Synay.	Spoke with him in the mountain of Sinai.
With empty wombe, fastynge many a day,	With empty belly, fasting many a day,
Receyved he the lawe that was writen	Received he the law that was written
With Goddes fynger; and Elye, wel ye witen,	With God's finger; and Elijah, you know well,
In mount Oreb, er he hadde any speche	In mount Horeb, before he had any speech
With hye God, that is oure lyves leche,	With high God, who is our life's physician,
He fasted longe and was in contemplaunce.	He fasted long and was in meditation.
"Aaron, that hadde the temple in governaunce,	"Aaron, who had the temple in governance,
And eek the othere preestes everichon,	And also the other priests every one,
Into the temple whan they sholde gon	Into the temple when they should go
To preye for the peple and do servyse,	To pray for the people and do service,
They nolden drynken in no maner wyse	They would not drink in any sort of way
No drynke which that myghte hem dronke make,	Any drink which might make them drunk,
But there in abstinence preye and wake,	But there in abstinence pray and keep vigil,
Lest that they deyden. Taak heede what I seye!	Lest they died. Take heed what I say!
But they be sobre that for the peple preye,	Unless they are sober who for the people pray,
War that -- I seye namoore, for it suffiseth.	Beware that -- I say no more, for it suffices.
"Oure Lord Jhesu, as hooly writ devyseth,	"Our Lord Jesus, as holy writ devises,
Yaf us ensample of fastynge and preyeres.	Gave us an example of fasting and prayers.
Therfore we mendynantz, we sely freres,	Therefore we mendicants, we innocent friars,
Been wedded to poverte and continence,	Are wedded to poverty and chastity,
To charite, humblesse, and abstinence,	To charity, humility, and abstinence,
To persecucioun for rightwisnesse,	To persecution for righteousness,
To wepynge, misericorde, and clennesse.	To weeping, charity, and purity.
And therfore may ye se that oure preyeres --	And therefore may you see that our prayers --
I speke of us, we mendynantz, we freres --	I speak of us, we mendicants, we friars --
Been to the hye God moore acceptable	Are to the high God more acceptable
Than youres, with youre feestes at the table.	Than yours, with your feasts at the table.
Fro Paradys first, if I shal nat lye,	From Paradise first, if I shall not lie,
Was man out chaced for his glotonye;	Was man chased out for his gluttony;
And chaast was man in Paradys, certeyn.	And chaste was man in Paradise, certainly.
"But herkne now, Thomas, what I shal seyn.	"But hearken now, Thomas, what I shall say.
I ne have no text of it, as I suppose,	I have no text for it, as I suppose,
But I shal fynde it in a maner glose,	But I shall find it in some sort of gloss (interpretation),
That specially oure sweete Lord Jhesus	That especially our sweet Lord Jesus
Spak this by freres, whan he seyde thus:	Spoke this about friars, when he said thus:
`Blessed be they that povere in spirit been.'	`Blessed are they who are poor in spirit.'
And so forth al the gospel may ye seen,	And so forth all the gospel may you see,
Wher it be likker oure professioun,	Whether it is more like our profession,
Or hirs that swymmen in possessioun.	Or theirs who swim in possessions.
Fy on hire pompe and on hire glotonye!	Fie on their pomp and on their gluttony!
And for hir lewednesse I hem diffye.	And for their ignorance I scorn them.
"Me thynketh they been lyk Jovinyan,	"I think they are like Jovinian,
Fat as a whale, and walkynge as a swan,	Fat as a whale, and waddling like a swan,
Al vinolent as botel in the spence.	As full of wine as a bottle in the pantry.
Hir preyere is of ful greet reverence,	Their prayer is of full great reverence,
Whan they for soules seye the psalm of Davit:	When they for souls say the psalm of David:
Lo, `buf!' they seye, `cor meum eructavit!'	Lo, `buf!' they say (belch), `my heart has uttered' (a good word)!
Who folweth Cristes gospel and his foore,	Who follows Christ's gospel and his path,
But we that humble been, and chaast, and poore,	But we who are humble, and chaste, and poor,
Werkeris of Goddes word, nat auditours?	Workers of God's word, not mere listeners?
Therfore, right as an hauk up at a sours	Therefore, just as a hawk upon an upward flight
Up springeth into th' eir, right so prayeres	Up springs into the' air, right so prayers
Of charitable and chaste bisy freres	Of charitable and chaste busy friars
Maken hir sours to Goddes eres two.	Make their upward flight to God's two ears.
Thomas, Thomas! So moote I ryde or go,	Thomas, Thomas! As I may ride or walk,
And by that lord that clepid is Seint Yve,	And by that lord who is called Saint Yve,
Nere thou oure brother, sholdestou nat thryve.	Were thou not our brother, thou shouldest not thrive.
In our chapitre praye we day and nyght	In our assembly we pray day and night
To Crist, that he thee sende heele and myght	To Christ, that he send thee health and strength
Thy body for to weelden hastily."	Thy body to move with ease hastily."
"God woot," quod he, "no thyng therof feele I!	"God knows," said he, "no thing thereof feel I!
As help me Crist, as I in fewe yeres,	So help me Christ, I in few years,
Have spent upon diverse manere freres	Have spent upon different sorts of friars
Ful many a pound; yet fare I never the bet.	Very many a pound; yet fare I never the better.
Certeyn, my good have I almoost biset.	Certainly, I have almost spent all my goods.
Farwel, my gold, for it is al ago!"	Farewell, my gold, for it is all gone!"
The frere answerde, "O Thomas, dostow so?	The friar answered, "Oh Thomas, dost thou so?
What nedeth yow diverse freres seche?	Why do you need to seek various friars?
What nedeth hym that hath a parfit leche	Why does one who has a perfect physician need
To sechen othere leches in the toun?	To seek other physicians in the town?
Youre inconstance is youre confusioun.	Your inconstancy is your ruin.
Holde ye thanne me, or elles oure covent,	Consider you then me, or else our convent,
To praye for yow been insufficient?	To be insufficient to pray for you?
Thomas, that jape nys nat worth a myte.	Thomas, that trick is not worth a half a farthing.
Youre maladye is for we han to lyte.	Your malady is because we have too little.
A, yif that covent half a quarter otes!	Ah, give that convent half a quarter (four bushels) oats!
A, yif that covent foure and twenty grotes!	A, give that convent four and twenty groats (four pences)!
A, yif that frere a peny, and lat hym go!	A, give that friar a penny, and let him go!
Nay, nay, Thomas, it may no thyng be so!	Nay, nay, Thomas, it may in no way be so!
What is a ferthyng worth parted in twelve?	What is a farthing worth divided into twelve?
Lo, ech thyng that is oned in himselve	Lo, each thing that is united in itself
Is moore strong than whan it is toscatered.	Is more strong than when it is all scattered.
Thomas, of me thou shalt nat been yflatered;	Thomas, by me thou shalt not be flattered;
Thou woldest han oure labour al for noght.	Thou wouldest have our labor all for nothing.
The hye God, that al this world hath wroght,	The high God, who all this world has wrought,
Seith that the werkman worthy is his hyre.	Says that the workman is worthy of his hire.
Thomas, noght of youre tresor I desire	Thomas, I do not desire any of your treasure
As for myself, but that al oure covent	For myself, but because all our convent
To preye for yow is ay so diligent,	To pray for you is always so diligent,
And for to buylden Cristes owene chirche.	And to build Christ's own church.
Thomas, if ye wol lernen for to wirche,	Thomas, if you want to learn what to do,
Of buyldynge up of chirches may ye fynde	Concerning building up of churches you can find
If it be good in Thomas lyf of Inde.	If it be good in the life of Thomas of India.
Ye lye heere ful of anger and of ire,	You lie here full of anger and of ire,
With which the devel set youre herte afyre,	With which the devil set your heart afire,
And chiden heere the sely innocent,	And chide here the poor innocent,
Youre wyf, that is so meke and pacient.	Your wife, who is so meek and patient.
And therfore, Thomas, trowe me if thee leste,	And therefore, Thomas, believe me if thou wish,
Ne stryve nat with thy wyf, as for thy beste;	Strive not with thy wife, for thine own good;
And ber this word awey now, by thy feith;	And bear this word away now, by thy faith;
Touchynge swich thyng, lo, what the wise seith:	Concerning such thing, lo, what the wise man says:
`Withinne thyn hous ne be thou no leon;	`Within thy house be thou no lion;
To thy subgitz do noon oppression,	To thy subjects do no oppression,
Ne make thyne aqueyntances nat to flee.'	Nor make thy acquaintances to flee.'
And, Thomas, yet eft-soones I charge thee,	And, Thomas, yet again I command thee,
Be war from Ire that in thy bosom slepeth;	Beware of Ire that in thy bosom sleeps;
War fro the serpent that so slily crepeth	Beware of the serpent that so slyly creeps
Under the gras and styngeth subtilly.	Under the grass and stings subtly.
Be war, my sone, and herkne paciently	Beware, my son, and hearken patiently
That twenty thousand men han lost hir lyves	That twenty thousand men have lost their lives
For stryvyng with hir lemmans and hir wyves.	For striving with their sweethearts and their wives.
Now sith ye han so hooly meke a wyf,	Now since you have so holy meek a wife,
What nedeth yow, Thomas, to maken stryf?	Why do you need, Thomas, to make strife?
Ther nys, ywys, no serpent so cruel,	There is, indeed, no serpent so cruel,
Whan man tret on his tayl, ne half so fel,	When man treads on his tail, nor half so fierce,
As womman is, whan she hath caught an ire;	As woman is, when she has become angry;
Vengeance is thanne al that they desire.	Vengeance is then all that they desire.
Ire is a synne, oon of the grete of sevene,	Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven,
Abhomynable unto the God of hevene;	Abominable unto the God of heaven;
And to hymself it is destruccion.	And to himself it is destruction.
This every lewed viker or person	This every ignorant vicar or parson
Kan seye, how ire engendreth homycide.	Can say, how ire engenders homicide.
Ire is, in sooth, executour of pryde.	Ire is, in truth, executor of pride.
I koude of ire seye so muche sorwe,	I could of ire say so much sorrow,
My tale sholde laste til to-morwe.	My tale should last until to-morrow.
And therfore preye I God bothe day and nyght	And therefore pray I God both day and night
An irous man, God sende hym litel myght!	An angry man, God send him little power!
It is greet harm and certes greet pitee	It is great harm and certainly great pity
To sette an irous man in heigh degree.	To set an angry man in high position.
"Whilom ther was an irous potestat,	"Once there was an angry potentate,
As seith Senek, that, durynge his estaat,	As says Seneca, who, during his reign,
Upon a day out ryden knyghtes two,	Upon a day out rode two knights,
And as Fortune wolde that it were so,	And as Fortune would that it were so,
That oon of hem cam hoom, that oother noght.	That one of them came home, that other did not.
Anon the knyght bifore the juge is broght,	At once the knight is brought before the judge,
That seyde thus, `Thou hast thy felawe slayn,	Who said thus, `Thou hast thy fellow slain,
For which I deme thee to the deeth, certayn.'	For which I condemn thee to the death, certainly.'
And to another knyght comanded he,	And to another knight commanded he,
`Go lede hym to the deeth, I charge thee.'	`Go lead him to the death, I charge thee.'
And happed, as they wente by the weye	And it happened, as they went by the way
Toward the place ther he sholde deye,	Toward the place where he should die,
The knyght cam which men wenden had be deed.	The knight came who men believed had been dead.
Thanne thoughte they it were the beste reed	Then thought they it would be the best plan
To lede hem bothe to the juge agayn.	To lead them both to the judge again.
They seiden, `Lord, the knyght ne hath nat slayn	They said, `Lord, the knight has not slain
His felawe; heere he standeth hool alyve.'	His fellow; here he stands whole and alive.'
`Ye shul be deed,' quod he, `so moot I thryve!	`You shall be dead,' said he, `as I may thrive!
That is to seyn, bothe oon, and two, and thre!'	That is to say, both one, and two, and three!'
And to the firste knyght right thus spak he,	And to the first knight right thus spoke he,
`I dampned thee; thou most algate be deed.	`I condemned thee; thou must therefore be dead.
And thou also most nedes lese thyn heed,	And thou also must of necessity lose thy head,
For thou art cause why thy felawe deyth.'	For thou art the cause why thy fellow dies.'
And to the thridde knyght right thus he seith,	And to the third knight right thus he says,
`Thou hast nat doon that I comanded thee.'	`Thou hast not done what I commanded thee.'
And thus he dide doon sleen hem alle thre.	And thus he caused them all three to be slain.
"Irous Cambises was eek dronkelewe,	"Angry Cambises was also a drunkard,
And ay delited hym to been a shrewe.	And it always delighted him to be a scoundrel.
And so bifel, a lord of his meynee	And as it happened, a lord of his household
That loved vertuous moralitee	Who loved virtuous morality
Seyde on a day bitwix hem two right thus:	Said on a day betwixt them two right thus:
"`A lord is lost, if he be vicius;	"`A lord is lost, if he be vicious;
And dronkenesse is eek a foul record	And drunkenness is also a foul reputation
Of any man, and namely in a lord.	Of any man, and especially in a lord.
Ther is ful many an eye and many an ere	There is full many an eye and many an ear
Awaityng on a lord, and he noot where.	Watching a lord, and he knows not where.
For Goddes love, drynk moore attemprely!	For God's love, drink more temperately!
Wyn maketh man to lesen wrecchedly	Wine makes man to lose wretchedly
His mynde and eek his lymes everichon.'	His mind and also his limbs every one.'
"`The revers shaltou se,' quod he, `anon,	"`The reverse shalt thou see,' said he, `right now,
And preve it by thyn owene experience,	And prove it by thy own experience,
That wyn ne dooth to folk no swich offence.	That wine does to folk no such offence.
Ther is no wyn bireveth me my myght	There is no wine that deprives me of my power
Of hand ne foot, ne of myne eyen sight.'	Of hand nor foot, nor of my eyesight.'
And for despit he drank ful muchel moore,	And for spite he drank very much more,
An hondred part, than he hadde don bifoore;	By a hundred times, than he had done before;
And right anon this irous, cursed wrecche	And right away this angry, cursed wretch
Leet this knyghtes sone bifore hym fecche,	Had this knight's son fetched before him,
Comandynge hym he sholde bifore hym stonde.	Commanding him he should before him stand.
And sodeynly he took his bowe in honde,	And suddenly he took his bow in hand,
And up the streng he pulled to his ere,	And up the string he pulled to his ear,
And with an arwe he slow the child right there.	And with an arrow he slew the child right there.
`Now wheither have I a siker hand or noon?'	`Now tell me whether I have a sure hand or not?'
Quod he; `Is al my myght and mynde agon?	Said he; `Is all my power and mind gone?
Hath wyn bireved me myn eyen sight?'	Has wine bereft me of my eyesight?'
What sholde I telle th' answere of the knyght?	Why should I tell the answer of the knight?
His sone was slayn; ther is namoore to seye.	His son was slain; there is no more to say.
Beth war, therfore, with lordes how ye pleye.	Beware, therefore, how you act with lords.
Syngeth Placebo and `I shal, if I kan,'	Sing 'I shall please' and `I shall, if I can,'
But if it be unto a povre man.	Unless it be unto a poor man.
To a povre man men sholde his vices telle,	To a poor man one should tell his vices,
But nat to a lord, thogh he sholde go to helle.	But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.
"Lo irous Cirus, thilke Percien,	"Lo angry Cyrus, that Persian,
How he destroyed the ryver of Gysen,	How he destroyed the river of Gysen,
For that an hors of his was dreynt therinne,	Because a horse of his was drowned therein,
Whan that he wente Babiloigne to wynne.	When he went to conquer Babylon.
He made that the ryver was so smal	He made it that the river was so small
That wommen myghte wade it over al.	That women could wade it everywhere.
Lo, what seyde he that so wel teche kan?	Lo, what said he who so well can teach?
`Ne be no felawe to an irous man,	`Be no fellow to an angry man,
Ne with no wood man walke by the weye,	Nor with no enraged man walk by the way,
Lest thee repente;' I wol no ferther seye.	Lest thee repent;' I will no further say.
"Now, Thomas, leeve brother, lef thyn ire;	"Now, Thomas, dear brother, leave thine ire;
Thou shalt me fynde as just as is a squyre.	Thou shalt me find as true as is a carpenter's square.
Hoold nat the develes knyf ay at thyn herte --	Hold not the devil's knife always at thy heart --
Thyn angre dooth thee al to soore smerte --	Thine anger causes thee all too sorely to suffer --
But shewe to me al thy confessioun."	But show to me all thy confession."
"Nay," quod the sike man, "by Seint Symoun!	"Nay," said the sick man, "by Saint Symoun!
I have be shryven this day at my curat.	I have been shriven this day by my curate.
I have hym toold hoolly al myn estat;	I have him told completely all my condition;
Nedeth namoore to speken of it," seith he,	It needs no more to speak of it," says he,
"But if me list, of myn humylitee."	"Unless I so wish, out of my humility."
"Yif me thanne of thy gold, to make oure cloystre,"	"Give me then of thy gold, to make our cloister,"
Quod he, "for many a muscle and many an oystre,	Said he, "for many a mussel and many an oyster,
Whan othere men han ben ful wel at eyse,	When other men have been full well at ease,
Hath been oure foode, our cloystre for to reyse.	Have been our food, our cloister to erect.
And yet, God woot, unnethe the fundement	And yet, God knows, hardly the foundation
Parfourned is, ne of our pavement	Is finished, nor of our pavement
Nys nat a tyle yet withinne oure wones.	There is not a tile yet within our dwelling.
By God, we owen fourty pound for stones.	By God, we owe forty pounds for stones.
"Now help, Thomas, for hym that harwed helle!	"Now help, Thomas, for him who despoiled hell of its captives!
For elles moste we oure bookes selle.	For otherwise we must sell our books.
And if yow lakke oure predicacioun,	And if you lack our preaching,
Thanne goth the world al to destruccioun.	Then all the world goes to destruction.
For whoso wolde us fro this world bireve,	For whoever would rob us from this world,
So God me save, Thomas, by youre leve,	So save me God, Thomas, by your leave,
He wolde bireve out of this world the sonne.	He would take the sun out of this world.
For who kan teche and werchen as we konne?	For who can teach and work as we know how?
And that is nat of litel tyme," quod he,	And that is not of recent times," said he,
"But syn Elye was, or Elise,	"But since Elijah was, or Elisha,
Han freres been -- that fynde I of record --	Have friars been -- that I find in the records --
In charitee, ythanked be oure Lord!	In charity, thanked be our Lord!
Now Thomas, help, for seinte charitee!"	Now Thomas, help, for holy charity!"
And doun anon he sette hym on his knee.	And down at once he set himself on his knee.
This sike man wax wel ny wood for ire;	This sick man grew well nigh mad for ire;
He wolde that the frere had been on-fire	He wished that the friar had been afire
With his false dissymulacioun.	With his false dissimulation.
"Swich thyng as is in my possessioun,"	"Such a thing as is in my possession,"
Quod he, "that may I yeve, and noon oother.	Said he, "that can I give, and none other.
Ye sey me thus, how that I am youre brother?"	You say me thus, that I am your brother?"
"Ye, certes," quod the frere, "trusteth weel.	"Yes, certainly," said the friar, "trust well.
I took oure dame oure lettre with oure seel."	I gave our lady our letter with our seal."
"Now wel," quod he, "and somwhat shal I yive	"Well now," said he, "and something shall I give
Unto youre hooly covent whil I lyve;	Unto your holy convent while I live;
And in thyn hand thou shalt it have anon,	And in thy hand thou shalt it have right now,
On this condicion, and oother noon,	On this condition, and none other,
That thou departe it so, my deere brother,	That thou divide it so, my dear brother,
That every frere have also muche as oother.	That every friar have as much as the other.
This shaltou swere on thy professioun,	This shalt thou swear on thy religious vows,
Withouten fraude or cavillacioun."	Without fraud or quibbling."
"I swere it," quod this frere, "by my feith!"	"I swear it," said this friar, "by my faith!"
And therwithal his hand in his he leith,	And therewith his hand in his he lays,
"Lo, heer my feith; in me shal be no lak."	"Lo, have here my faith; I shall not fail (to keep my word)."
"Now thanne, put in thyn hand doun by my bak,"	"Now then, put in thy hand down by my back,"
Seyde this man, "and grope wel bihynde.	Said this man, "and grope well behind.
Bynethe my buttok there shaltow fynde	Beneath my buttock where shalt thou find
A thyng that I have hyd in pryvetee."	A thing that I have hidden in private."
"A!" thoghte this frere, "That shal go with me!"	"Ah!" thought this friar, "That shall go with me!"
And doun his hand he launcheth to the clifte	And down his hand he thrusts to the cleft
In hope for to fynde there a yifte.	In hope to find there a gift.
And whan this sike man felte this frere	And when this sick man felt this friar
Aboute his tuwel grope there and heere,	About his anus grope there and here,
Amydde his hand he leet the frere a fart;	Amid his hand he let the friar a fart;
Ther nys no capul, drawynge in a cart,	There is no horse, pulling a cart,
That myghte have lete a fart of swich a soun.	That could have let a fart of such a sound.
The frere up stirte as dooth a wood leoun --	The friar up started as does a mad lion --
"A, false cherl," quod he, "for Goddes bones!	"Ah, false churl," said he, "for God's bones!
This hastow for despit doon for the nones.	This hast thou done on purpose for spite.
Thou shalt abye this fart, if that I may!"	Thou shalt pay for this fart, if I can (do so)!"
His meynee, whiche that herden this affray,	His servants, who heard this affray,
Cam lepynge in and chaced out the frere;	Came leaping in and chased out the friar;
And forth he gooth, with a ful angry cheere,	And forth he goes, with a very angry look,
And fette his felawe, ther as lay his stoor.	And fetched his fellow, where lay his store.
He looked as it were a wilde boor;	He looked like a wild boar;
He grynte with his teeth, so was he wrooth.	He gnashed his teeth, he was so angry.
A sturdy paas doun to the court he gooth,	At a rapid pace down to the court he goes,
Wher as ther woned a man of greet honour,	Where there dwelt a man of greet honor,
To whom that he was alwey confessour.	To whom he was always confessor.
This worthy man was lord of that village.	This worthy man was lord of that village.
This frere cam as he were in a rage,	This friar came as if he were in a rage,
Where as this lord sat etyng at his bord;	Where the lord sat eating at his table;
Unnethes myghte the frere speke a word,	Hardly could the friar speak a word,
Til atte laste he seyde, "God yow see!"	Until at the last he said, "God you see!"
This lord gan looke, and seide, "Benedicitee!	This lord did look, and said, "Bless me!
What, frere John, what maner world is this?	What, friar John, what sort of carrying on is this?
I se wel that som thyng ther is amys;	I see well that there is something amiss;
Ye looken as the wode were ful of thevys.	You look as if the wood were full of thieves.
Sit doun anon, and tel me what youre grief is,	Sit down right now, and tell me what your grief is,
And it shal been amended, if I may."	And it shall be amended, if I can."
"I have," quod he, "had a despit this day,	"I have," said he, "had an insult this day,
God yelde yow, adoun in youre village,	God reward you, down in your village,
That in this world is noon so povre a page	That in this world is none so poor a servant boy
That he nolde have abhomynacioun	That he would not be nauseated
Of that I have receyved in youre toun.	By what I have received in your town.
And yet ne greveth me nothyng so soore,	And yet there grieves me nothing so sore,
As that this olde cherl with lokkes hoore	As that this old churl with white locks
Blasphemed hath oure hooly covent eke."	Blasphemed has our holy convent as well."
"Now, maister," quod this lord, "I yow biseke --"	"Now, master," said this lord, "I you beseech --"
"No maister, sire," quod he, "but servitour,	"No master, sir," said he, "but servant,
Thogh I have had in scole that honour.	Though I have had in school that honor.
God liketh nat that `Raby' men us calle,	God likes not that `Rabbi' men us call,
Neither in market ne in youre large halle."	Neither in market nor in your large hall."
"No fors," quod he, "but tel me al youre grief."	"No matter," said he, "but tell me all your grief."
"Sire," quod this frere, "an odious meschief	"Sir," said this friar, "an odious mischief
This day bityd is to myn ordre and me,	This day has happened to my order and me,
And so, per consequens, to ech degree	And so, consequently, to each degree
Of hooly chirche -- God amende it soone!"	Of holy church -- God amend it soon!"
"Sire," quod the lord, "ye woot what is to doone.	"Sir," said the lord, "you know what is to be done.
Distempre yow noght; ye be my confessour;	Do not be angry; you are my confessor;
Ye been the salt of the erthe and the savour.	You are the salt of the earth and the delight.
For Goddes love, youre pacience ye holde!	For God's love, keep your patience!
Tel me youre grief." And he anon hym tolde,	Tell me your grief." And he straightway told him,
As ye han herd biforn -- ye woot wel what.	As you have heard before -- you know well what.
The lady of the hous ay stille sat	The lady of the house always still sat
Til she had herd what the frere sayde.	Until she had heard what the friar said.
"Ey, Goddes mooder," quod she, "Blisful mayde!	"Ey, God's mother," said she, "Blissful maid!
Is ther oght elles? Telle me feithfully."	Is there anything else? Tell me faithfully."
"Madame," quod he, "how thynke ye herby?"	"My lady," said he, "how think you of this?"
"How that me thynketh?" quod she. "So God me speede,	"How I think" said she. "So help me God,
I seye a cherl hath doon a cherles dede.	I say a churl has done a churl's deed.
What shold I seye? God lat hym nevere thee!	What should I say? God let him never prosper!
His sike heed is ful of vanytee;	His sick head is full of foolishness;
I holde hym in a manere frenesye."	I consider him in a sort of delirium."
"Madame," quod he, "by God, I shal nat lye,	"My lady," said he, "by God, I shall not lie,
But I on oother wyse may be wreke,	Unless I can be avenged in another manner,
I shal disclaundre hym over al ther I speke,	I shall defame him wherever I speak,
This false blasphemour that charged me	This false blasphemer who charged me
To parte that wol nat departed be	To divide that which will not be divided
To every man yliche, with meschaunce!"	Equally to every man, with bad luck (to him)!"
The lord sat stille as he were in a traunce,	The lord sat still as if he were in a trance,
And in his herte he rolled up and doun,	And in his heart he rolled up and down,
"How hadde this cherl ymaginacioun	"How had this churl imagination
To shewe swich a probleme to the frere?	To show such a problem to the friar?
Nevere erst er now herde I of swich mateere.	Never previously before now heard I of such a matter.
I trowe the devel putte it in his mynde.	I believe the devil put it in his mind.
In ars-metrike shal ther no man fynde,	In the art of measuring (arithmetic) shall there no man find,
Biforn this day, of swich a question.	Before this day, such a problem.
Who sholde make a demonstracion	Who should make a logical proof
That every man sholde have yliche his part	That every man should have equally his part
As of the soun or savour of a fart?	As of the sound or odor of a fart?
O nyce, proude cherl, I shrewe his face!	Oh ingenious, proud churl, I curse his face!
Lo, sires," quod the lord, "with harde grace!	Lo, sirs," said the lord, "with bad luck (to him)!
Who evere herde of swich a thyng er now?	Who ever heard of such a thing before now?
To every man ylike? Tel me how.	To every man equally? Tell me how.
It is an inpossible; it may nat be.	It is an impossibility; it can not be.
Ey, nyce cherl, God lete him nevere thee!	Ey, clever churl, God let him never prosper!
The rumblynge of a fart, and every soun,	The rumbling of a fart, and every sound,
Nis but of eir reverberacioun,	Is nothing but reverberation of air,
And evere it wasteth litel and litel awey.	And ever it wastes away little by little.
Ther is no man kan deemen, by my fey,	There is no man can judge, by my faith,
If that it were departed equally.	If it were divided equally.
What, lo, my cherl, lo, yet how shrewedly	What, lo, my churl, lo, yet how shrewdly
Unto my confessour to-day he spak!	Unto my confessor to-day he spoke!
I holde hym certeyn a demonyak!	I consider him certainly one possessed by a demon!
Now ete youre mete, and lat the cherl go pleye;	Now eat your food, and let the churl go play;
Lat hym go honge hymself a devel weye!"	Let him go hang himself in the devil's name!"
Now stood the lordes squier at the bord,	Now stood the lord's squire at the board,
That karf his mete, and herde word by word	Who carved his meat, and heard word by word
Of alle thynges whiche I have yow sayd.	Of all the things which I have told you.
"My lord," quod he, "be ye nat yvele apayd,	"My lord," said he, "if you be not displeased,
I koude telle, for a gowne-clooth,	I could tell, for a cloth to make a gown,
To yow, sire frere, so ye be nat wrooth,	To you, sir friar, providing you be not angry,
How that this fart sholde evene deled be	How this fart should evenly be divided
Among youre covent, if it lyked me."	Among your convent, if it pleased me."
"Tel," quod the lord, "and thou shalt have anon	"Tell," said the lord, "and thou shalt have straightway
A gowne-clooth, by God and by Seint John!"	A gown-cloth, by God and by Saint John!"
"My lord," quod he, "whan that the weder is fair,	"My lord," said he, "when the weather is fair,
Withouten wynd or perturbynge of air,	Without wind or disturbance of air,
Lat brynge a cartwheel heere into this halle;	Let a cartwheel be brought here into this hall;
But looke that it have his spokes alle --	But see that it has all its spokes --
Twelve spokes hath a cartwheel comunly.	Twelve spokes has a cartwheel commonly.
And bryng me thanne twelve freres. Woot ye why?	And bring me then twelve friars. Know you why?
For thrittene is a covent, as I gesse.	For thirteen is a convent, as I believe.
Youre confessour heere, for his worthynesse,	Your confessor here, for his worthiness,
Shal parfourne up the nombre of his covent.	Shall complete the number of his convent.
Thanne shal they knele doun, by oon assent,	Then shall they kneel down, all together,
And to every spokes ende, in this manere,	And to every spoke's end, in this manner,
Ful sadly leye his nose shal a frere.	A friar shall very firmly lay his nose.
Youre noble confessour -- there God hym save! --	Your noble confessor -- may God him save! --
Shal holde his nose upright under the nave.	Shall hold his nose upright under the nave.
Thanne shal this cherl, with bely stif and toght	Then shall this churl, with belly stiff and taut
As any tabour, hyder been ybroght;	As any drum, hither be brought;
And sette hym on the wheel right of this cart,	And set him right on the wheel of this cart,
Upon the nave, and make hym lete a fart.	Upon the nave, and make him let a fart.
And ye shul seen, up peril of my lyf,	And you shall see, on peril of my life (I swear),
By preeve which that is demonstratif,	By proof which is logical,
That equally the soun of it wol wende,	That equally the sound of it will go,
And eke the stynk, unto the spokes ende,	And also the stink, unto the spokes' ends,
Save that this worthy man, youre confessour,	Except that this worthy man, your confessor,
By cause he is a man of greet honour,	Because he is a man of greet honor,
Shal have the firste fruyt, as resoun is.	Shall have the first fruit, as is reasonable.
The noble usage of freres yet is this,	The noble usage of friars yet is this,
The worthy men of hem shul first be served;	The worthy men of them shall first be served;
And certeinly he hath it weel disserved.	And certainly he has it well deserved.
He hath to-day taught us so muche good	He has to-day taught us so much good
With prechyng in the pulpit ther he stood,	With preaching in the pulpit where he stood,
That I may vouche sauf, I sey for me,	That I can affirm, I say for me,
He hadde the firste smel of fartes thre;	He had the first smell of three farts;
And so wolde al his covent hardily,	And so would all his convent certainly (agree),
He bereth hym so faire and hoolily."	He bears him so faire and holily."
The lord, the lady, and ech man, save the frere,	The lord, the lady, and each man, except the friar,
Seyde that Jankyn spak, in this matere,	Said that Jankyn spoke, in this matter,
As wel as Euclide [dide] or Ptholomee.	As well as Euclid or Ptolemy.
Touchynge the cherl, they seyde, subtiltee	Concerning the churl, they said, shrewdness
And heigh wit made hym speken as he spak;	And great intelligence made him speak as he spoke;
He nys no fool, ne no demonyak.	He is no fool, nor possessed by any demon.
And Jankyn hath ywonne a newe gowne --	And Jankyn has won a new gown --
My tale is doon; we been almoost at towne.	My tale is done; we are almost at town.
Heere endeth the Somonours Tale.	Here ends the Summoner's Tale.
Ther was, as telleth Titus Livius,	There was, as Titus Livius tells,
A knyght that called was Virginius,	A knight who was called Virginius,
Fulfild of honour and of worthynesse,	Filled with honor and with worthiness,
And strong of freendes, and of greet richesse.	And having powerful friends, and great wealth.
This knyght a doghter hadde by his wyf;	This knight had a daughter by his wife;
No children hadde he mo in al his lyf.	No more children had he in all his life.
Fair was this mayde in excellent beautee	Fair was this maid in excellent beauty
Aboven every wight that man may see;	Above every person that one may see;
For Nature hath with sovereyn diligence	For Nature has with her greatest diligence
Yformed hire in so greet excellence,	Formed her in such great excellence,
As though she wolde seyn, "Lo! I, Nature,	As though she would say, "Lo! I, Nature,
Thus kan I forme and peynte a creature,	Thus can I form and paint a creature,
Whan that me list; who kan me countrefete?	When I wish; who can counterfeit my work?
Pigmalion noght, though he ay forge and bete,	Not Pygmalion, though he always forge and beat,
Or grave, or peynte; for I dar wel seyn	Or carve, or paint; for I dare well say
Apelles, Zanzis, sholde werche in veyn	Apelles or Zeuxis, should work in vain
Outher to grave, or peynte, or forge, or bete,	Either to carve, or paint, or forge, or beat,
If they presumed me to countrefete.	If they presumed to imitate me.
For He that is the formere principal	For He who is the principal creator
Hath maked me his vicaire general,	Has appointed me his Chief Deputy,
To forme and peynten erthely creaturis	To form and paint earthly creatures
Right as me list, and ech thyng in my cure is	Right as I wish, and in my control is each thing
Under the moone, that may wane and waxe,	Under the moon, which may grow less or grow larger,
And for my werk right no thyng wol I axe;	And nothing at all will I ask for my work;
My lord and I been ful of oon accord.	My lord and I are fully in agreement.
I made hire to the worshipe of my lord;	I made her to the worship of my lord;
So do I alle myne othere creatures,	So do I all my other creatures,
What colour that they han or what figures."	Whatever complexion they have or whatever shapes."
Thus semeth me that Nature wolde seye.	It seems to me that Nature would say thus.
This mayde of age twelve yeer was and tweye,	This maid was twelve years of age and two,
In which that Nature hadde swich delit.	In whom Nature had such delight.
For right as she kan peynte a lilie whit,	For just as she can paint a lily white,
And reed a rose, right with swich peynture	And a rose red, just so with such pigments
She peynted hath this noble creature,	Has she painted this noble creature,
Er she were born, upon hir lymes fre,	Before she was born, upon her noble limbs,
Where as by right swiche colours sholde be;	Where such colors should rightly be;
And Phebus dyed hath hire tresses grete	And Phebus has dyed her great tresses
Lyk to the stremes of his burned heete.	Resembling the rays of his burnished sunbeams.
And if that excellent was hire beautee,	And if her beauty was excellent,
A thousand foold moore vertuous was she.	A thousand times more virtuous was she.
In hire ne lakked no condicioun	In her there lacked no characteristic
That is to preyse, as by discrecioun.	That is to be praised by (one with) sound moral judgement.
As wel in goost as body chast was she,	As well in spirit as in body chaste was she,
For which she floured in virginitee	For which she flourished in virginity
With alle humylitee and abstinence,	With all humility and abstinence,
With alle attemperaunce and pacience,	With all temperance and patience,
With mesure eek of beryng and array.	With moderation also in demeanor and dress.
Discreet she was in answeryng alway;	She was always discreet in conversation;
Though she were wis as Pallas, dar I seyn,	Though she was wise as Pallas, I dare say,
Hir facound eek ful wommanly and pleyn,	Her manner of speaking was also very womanly and plain,
No countrefeted termes hadde she	No pretentious terms had she
To seme wys, but after hir degree	To seem wise, but in accordance with her rank in life
She spak, and alle hire wordes, moore and lesse,	She spoke, and all her words, long speeches and brief,
Sownynge in vertu and in gentillesse.	In accord with virtue and nobility.
Shamefast she was in maydens shamefastnesse,	Modest she was in maidenly modesty,
Constant in herte, and evere in bisynesse	Constant in heart, and ever diligent
To dryve hire out of ydel slogardye.	To keep herself away from idle sluggishness.
Bacus hadde of hir mouth right no maistrie;	Bacchus had no mastery of her mouth at all;
For wyn and youthe dooth Venus encresse,	For wine and youth does increase (the power of) Venus,
As men in fyr wol casten oille or greesse.	As if men would cast oil or grease into a fire.
And of hir owene vertu, unconstreyned,	And of her own moral strength, of her own free choice,
She hath ful ofte tyme syk hire feyned,	She has very often pretended to be ill,
For that she wolde fleen the compaignye	Because she wanted to flee the company
Where likly was to treten of folye,	Where there was likely to be talk of folly,
As is at feestes, revels, and at daunces,	As is at feasts, revels, and at dances,
That been occasions of daliaunces.	That provide opportunities for flirtations.
Swich thynges maken children for to be	Such things make children to be
To soone rype and boold, as men may se,	Too soon ripe and bold, as anyone can see,
Which is ful perilous and hath been yoore.	Which is very perilous and has been since long ago,
For al to soone may she lerne loore	For all too soon may she learn the lore
Of booldnesse, whan she woxen is a wyf.	Of boldness, when she is grown to be a wife.
And ye maistresses, in youre olde lyf,	And you mistresses, in your old age,
That lordes doghtres han in governaunce,	Who have lords' daughters in governance,
Ne taketh of my wordes no displesaunce.	Do not take of my words any displeasure.
Thenketh that ye been set in governynges	Think that you are set in charge
Of lordes doghtres oonly for two thynges:	Of lords' daughters only for two things:
Outher for ye han kept youre honestee,	Either because you have kept your chastity,
Or elles ye han falle in freletee,	Or else you have fallen into frailty,
And knowen wel ynough the olde daunce,	And know very well the tricks of the trade,
And han forsaken fully swich meschaunce	And have fully renounced such misconduct
For everemo; therfore, for Cristes sake,	For evermore; therefore, for Christ's sake,
To teche hem vertu looke that ye ne slake.	Look that you do not desisit from teaching them virtue.
A theef of venysoun, that hath forlaft	A thief of venison, who has abandoned
His likerousnesse and al his olde craft,	His greedy appetite and all his old craft,
Kan kepe a forest best of any man.	Can guard a forest better than any other man.
Now kepeth wel, for if ye wole, ye kan.	Now guard well, for if you want (to do it), you can.
Looke wel that ye unto no vice assente,	Take good care that you assent unto no vice,
Lest ye be dampned for youre wikke entente;	Lest you be damned for your wicked intent;
For whoso dooth, a traitour is, certeyn.	For whoever does so, is a traitor, certainly.
And taketh kep of that that I shal seyn:	And pay attention to what I shall say:
Of alle tresons sovereyn pestilence	Of all betrayals the supreme wickedness
Is whan a wight bitrayseth innocence.	Is when a person betrays innocence.
Ye fadres and ye moodres eek also,	You fathers and you mothers also as well,
Though ye han children, be it oon or mo,	If you have children, be it one or more,
Youre is the charge of al hir surveiaunce,	Yours is the responsibility for all their supervision,
Whil that they been under youre governaunce.	While they are under your governance.
Beth war, if by ensample of youre lyvynge,	Beware, lest by example of your (manner of) living,
Or by youre necligence in chastisynge,	Or by your negligence in chastising,
That they ne perisse; for I dar wel seye	That they should perish; for I dare well say
If that they doon, ye shul it deere abeye.	If they do, you shall dearly pay for it.
Under a shepherde softe and necligent	Under a soft and negligent shepherd
The wolf hath many a sheep and lamb torent.	The wolf has many a sheep and lamb torn to pieces.
Suffiseth oon ensample now as heere,	Let one ensample sufficefor the present,
For I moot turne agayn to my matere.	For I must turn again to my subject.
This mayde, of which I wol this tale expresse,	This maiden, of whom I will narrate this tale,
So kepte hirself hir neded no maistresse,	So guarded herself she needed no governess
For in hir lyvyng maydens myghten rede,	For in her manner of life maidens might read,
As in a book, every good word or dede	As in a book, every good word or deed
That longeth to a mayden vertuous,	That is proper to a virtuous maiden,
She was so prudent and so bountevous.	She was so prudent and so filled with good.
For which the fame out sprong on every syde,	For which sprang out all around the fame,
Bothe of hir beautee and hir bountee wyde,	Both of her beauty and her goodness widespread,
That thurgh that land they preised hire echone	So that throughout that land they praised her everyone
That loved vertu, save Envye allone,	Who loved virtue, save Envy alone,
That sory is of oother mennes wele	Who is sorry of other men's prosperity
And glad is of his sorwe and his unheele.	And is glad of his sorrow and his misery.
(The Doctour maketh this descripcioun.)	(The Doctor [St. Augustine] makes this description.)
This mayde upon a day wente in the toun	This maid upon a day went in the town
Toward a temple, with hire mooder deere,	Toward a temple, with her mother dear,
As is of yonge maydens the manere.	As is the manner of young maidens.
Now was ther thanne a justice in that toun,	Now was there then a justice in that town,
That governour was of that regioun.	Who was governor of that region.
And so bifel this juge his eyen caste	And it so happened that this judge cast his eyes
Upon this mayde, avysynge hym ful faste,	Upon this maid, considering her very intently,
As she cam forby ther as this juge stood.	As she passed by where this judge stood.
Anon his herte chaunged and his mood,	Immediately his heart changed and his mood,
So was he caught with beautee of this mayde,	So was he caught by the beauty of this maid,
And to hymself ful pryvely he sayde,	And to himself very secretly he said,
"This mayde shal be myn, for any man!"	"This maid shall be mine, despite what any man (may do)!"
Anon the feend into his herte ran,	Immediately. the fiend ran into his heart,
And taughte hym sodeynly that he by slyghte	And taught him suddenly that he by trickery
The mayden to his purpos wynne myghte.	Could win the maiden to his purpose.
For certes, by no force ne by no meede,	For certainly, not by any force nor by any bribery,
Hym thoughte, he was nat able for to speede;	He thought, would he be able to succeed;
For she was strong of freendes, and eek she	For she had powerful friends, and also she
Confermed was in swich soverayn bountee	Was confirmed in such supreme goodness
That wel he wiste he myghte hire nevere wynne	That he knew well he could never win her
As for to make hire with hir body synne.	And make her sin with her body.
For which, by greet deliberacioun,	For which, after great deliberation,
He sente after a cherl, was in the toun,	He sent for a churl, who was in the town,
Which that he knew for subtil and for boold.	Whom he knew for trickery and for boldness.
This juge unto this cherl his tale hath toold	This judge unto this churl his tale has told
In secree wise, and made hym to ensure	Secretly, and made him swear
He sholde telle it to no creature,	He should tell it to no creature,
And if he dide, he sholde lese his heed.	And if he did, he should lose his head.
Whan that assented was this cursed reed,	When this cursed plot was agreed upon
Glad was this juge, and maked him greet cheere,	Glad was this judge, and made much of him (the churl),
And yaf hym yiftes preciouse and deere.	And gave him precious and expensive gifts.
Whan shapen was al hire conspiracie	When all their conspiracy was planned
Fro point to point, how that his lecherie	In great detail, how his lechery
Parfourned sholde been ful subtilly,	Should be accomplished very subtly,
As ye shul heere it after openly,	As you shall later hear it clearly,
Hoom gooth the cherl, that highte Claudius.	Home goes the churl, who is called Claudius.
This false juge, that highte Apius,	This false judge, who is called Apius,
(So was his name, for this is no fable,	(Such was his name, for this is no fable,
But knowen for historial thyng notable;	But known for a noteworthy historical fact;
The sentence of it sooth is, out of doute),	The substance of it is true, beyond doubt),
This false juge gooth now faste aboute	This false judge goes now fast about
To hasten his delit al that he may.	Hastening his delight all that he can.
And so bifel soone after, on a day,	And so it happened soon after, on a certain day,
This false juge, as telleth us the storie,	This false judge, as the story tells us,
As he was wont, sat in his consistorie,	As he was accustomed, sat in his court,
And yaf his doomes upon sondry cas.	And gave his judgements upon various cases.
This false cherl cam forth a ful greet pas,	This false churl came forth at a very rapid pace,
And seyde, "Lord, if that it be youre wille,	And said, "Lord, if it be your will,
As dooth me right upon this pitous bille,	Do me justice concerning this piteous formal complaint,
In which I pleyne upon Virginius;	In which I complain about Virginius;
And if that he wol seyn it is nat thus,	And if he will say it is not thus,
I wol it preeve, and fynde good witnesse,	I will prove it, and find good evidence,
That sooth is that my bille wol expresse."	That what my formal complaint will express is truth."
The juge answerde, "Of this, in his absence,	The judge answered, "Of this, in his absence,
I may nat yeve diffynytyf sentence.	I can not give definitive judgment.
Lat do hym calle, and I wol gladly heere;	Let him be called, and I will gladly hear (the case);
Thou shalt have al right, and no wrong heere."	Thou shalt have all justice, and no wrong here."
Virginius cam to wite the juges wille,	Virginius came to learn the judge's will,
And right anon was rad this cursed bille;	And right away this cursed complaint was read;
The sentence of it was as ye shul heere:	The substance of it was as you shall hear:
"To yow, my lord, sire Apius so deere,	"To you, my lord, Sir Apius so dear,
Sheweth youre povre servant Claudius	Your poor servant Claudius shows
How that a knyght, called Virginius,	How a knight, called Virginius,
Agayns the lawe, agayn al equitee,	Against the law, against all equity,
Holdeth, expres agayn the wyl of me,	Expressly against my will, holds
My servant, which that is my thral by right,	My servant, who is my slave by right,
Which fro myn hous was stole upon a nyght,	Who was stolen from my house upon one night,
Whil that she was ful yong; this wol I preeve	While she was very young; this will I prove
By witnesse, lord, so that it nat yow greeve.	By evidence, lord, providing that you be not displeased.
She nys his doghter nat, what so he seye.	She is not his daughter, whatever he may say.
Wherfore to yow, my lord the juge, I preye,	Therefore to you, my lord judge, I pray,
Yeld me my thral, if that it be youre wille."	Yield me my slave, if it be your will."
Lo, this was al the sentence of his bille.	Lo, this was all the substance of his complaint.
Virginius gan upon the cherl biholde,	Virginius began to look upon the churl,
But hastily, er he his tale tolde,	Hastily, before he finished telling his tale,
And wolde have preeved it as sholde a knyght,	And would have proven it as a knight should (by battle),
And eek by witnessyng of many a wight,	And also by the evidence of many a person,
That al was fals that seyde his adversarie,	That all that his adversary said was false,
This cursed juge wolde no thyng tarie,	This cursed judge would not at all delay,
Ne heere a word moore of Virginius,	Nor hear one word more from Virginius,
But yaf his juggement, and seyde thus:	But gave his judgment, and said thus:
"I deeme anon this cherl his servant have;	"I decide that this churl should have his slave right now;
Thou shalt no lenger in thyn hous hir save.	Thou shalt no longer keep her in thine house.
Go bryng hire forth, and put hire in oure warde.	Go bring her forth, and put her in our guardianship.
The cherl shal have his thral, this I awarde."	The churl shall have his slave, this I decree."
And whan this worthy knyght Virginius	And when this worthy knight Virginius
Thurgh sentence of this justice Apius	Because of the verdict of this justice Apius
Moste by force his deere doghter yiven	By force had to give his dear daughter
Unto the juge, in lecherie to lyven,	Unto the judge, to live in lechery,
He gooth hym hoom, and sette him in his halle,	He goes home, and sat himself in his hall,
And leet anon his deere doghter calle,	And immediately had his dear daughter called,
And with a face deed as asshen colde	And with a face as dead as cold ashes
Upon hir humble face he gan biholde,	Upon her humble face he did behold,
With fadres pitee stikynge thurgh his herte,	With a father's pity stabbing through his heart,
Al wolde he from his purpos nat converte.	Although he would not deviate from his purpose.
"Doghter," quod he, "Virginia, by thy name,	"Daughter," said he, "Virginia, by thy name,
Ther been two weyes, outher deeth or shame,	There are two ways, either death or shame,
That thou most suffre; allas, that I was bore!	That thou most suffer; alas, that I was born!
For nevere thou deservedest wherfore	For never thou deservedest for whatever reason
To dyen with a swerd or with a knyf.	To die by a sword or by a knife.
O deere doghter, endere of my lyf,	O dear daughter, ender of my life,
Which I have fostred up with swich plesaunce	Whom I have nurured with such pleasure
That thou were nevere out of my remembraunce!	That thou were never out of my thoughts!
O doghter, which that art my laste wo,	O daughter, who art my greatest woe,
And in my lyf my laste joye also,	And in my life my greatest joy also,
O gemme of chastitee, in pacience	O gem of chastity, in patience
Take thou thy deeth, for this is my sentence.	Take thou thy death, for this is my decision.
For love, and nat for hate, thou most be deed;	For love, and not for hate, thou must be dead;
My pitous hand moot smyten of thyn heed.	My piteous hand must smite off thy head.
Allas, that evere Apius the say!	Alas, that ever Apius saw thee!
Thus hath he falsly jugged the to-day" --	For that reason he has falsely judged thee to-day" --
And tolde hire al the cas, as ye bifore	And told her the whole business, as you before
Han herd; nat nedeth for to telle it moore.	Have heard; there is no need to tell it again.
"O mercy, deere fader!" quod this mayde,	"O mercy, dear father!" said this maid,
And with that word she bothe hir armes layde	And with that word she both her arms laid
Aboute his nekke, as she was wont to do.	About his neck, as she was accustomed to do.
The teeris bruste out of hir eyen two,	The tears burst out of her two eyes,
And seyde, "Goode fader, shal I dye?	And said, "Good father, must I dye?
Is ther no grace, is ther no remedye?"	Is there no grace, is there no remedy?"
"No, certes, deere doghter myn," quod he.	"No, certainly, dear daughter mine," said he.
"Thanne yif me leyser, fader myn," quod she,	"Then give me time, father mine," said she,
"My deeth for to compleyne a litel space;	"To lament my death for a little while;
For, pardee, Jepte yaf his doghter grace	For, truly, Jeptha gave his daughter grace
For to compleyne, er he hir slow, allas!	To lament, before he slew her, alas!
And, God it woot, no thyng was hir trespas,	And, God knows it, her trespass was nothing,
But for she ran hir fader first to see,	Except that she ran first to see her father,
To welcome hym with greet solempnitee."	To welcome him with great solemnity."
And with that word she fil aswowne anon,	And with that word immediately she fell in a swoon,
And after, whan hir swownyng is agon,	And afterwards, when her swooning is gone,
She riseth up, and to hir fader sayde,	She rises up, and to her father said,
"Blissed be God that I shal dye a mayde!	"Blessed be God that I shall die a maid!
Yif me my deeth, er that I have a shame;	Give me my death, before I have dishonor;
Dooth with youre child youre wyl, a Goddes name!"	Do with your child your will, in God's name!"
And with that word she preyed hym ful ofte	And with that word she prayed him repeatedly
That with his swerd he wolde smyte softe;	That with his sword he would smite gently;
And with that word aswowne doun she fil.	And with that word down she fell in a swoon.
Hir fader, with ful sorweful herte and wil,	Her father, with very sorrowful heart and will,
Hir heed of smoot, and by the top it hente,	Struck off her head, and by the hair siezed it,
And to the juge he gan it to presente,	And he did present it to the judge,
As he sat yet in doom in consistorie.	As he sat yet rendering judgements in court.
And whan the juge it saugh, as seith the storie,	And when the judge saw it, as says the story,
He bad to take hym and anhange hym faste;	He ordered [his men] to take him and hang him at once;
But right anon a thousand peple in thraste,	But right away a thousand people burst in,
To save the knyght, for routhe and for pitee,	To save the knight, for compassion and for pity,
For knowen was the false iniquitee.	For the false wickedness was known.
The peple anon had suspect in this thyng,	The people immediately suspected in this matter,
By manere of the cherles chalangyng,	Because of the manner of the churl's claim,
That it was by the assent of Apius;	That it was by the conspiring of Apius;
They wisten wel that he was lecherus.	They knew well that he was lecherous.
For which unto this Apius they gon	For which unto this Apius they go
And caste hym in a prisoun right anon,	And cast him in a prison straightway,
Ther as he slow hymself; and Claudius,	Where he slew himself; and Claudius,
That servant was unto this Apius,	Who was servant unto this Apius,
Was demed for to hange upon a tree,	Was condemned to hang upon a tree,
But that Virginius, of his pitee,	Except that Virginius, of his pity,
So preyde for hym that he was exiled;	So prayed for him (Claudius) that he was exiled;
And elles, certes, he had been bigyled.	And also, certainly, he had been tricked (by Apius).
The remenant were anhanged, moore and lesse,	The remnant were hanged, high ranking and low,
That were consentant of this cursednesse.	Who were accessories to this crime.
Heere may men seen how synne hath his merite.	Here may men see how sin has its reward.
Beth war, for no man woot whom God wol smyte	Beware, for no man knows whom God will smite
In no degree, ne in which manere wyse;	In any rank, nor in what sort of way;
The worm of conscience may agryse	The worm of conscience may tremble for fear
Of wikked lyf, though it so pryvee be	Because of a wicked life, though it so secret be
That no man woot therof but God and he.	That no man knows about it but God and he.
For be he lewed man, or ellis lered,	For be he ignorant man, or else learned,
He noot how soone that he shal been afered.	He knows not how soon he shall be terrified.
Therfore I rede yow this conseil take:	Therefore I advise you to take this counsel:
Forsaketh synne, er synne yow forsake.	Abandon sin, before sin abandons you.
Heere is ended the Phisiciens Tale	Here ends the Physician's Tale.
Heere bigynneth the Shipmannes Tale.	Here begins the Shipman's Tale.
A marchant whilom dwelled at Seint-Denys,	A merchant once dwelled at Seint-Denis,
That riche was, for which men helde hym wys.	Who was rich, for which men considered him wise.
A wyf he hadde of excellent beautee;	He had a wife of excellent beauty;
And compaignable and revelous was she,	And she was sociable and fond of revelry,
Which is a thyng that causeth more dispence	Which is a thing that causes more expense
Than worth is al the chiere and reverence	Than is worth all the good cheer and reverence
That men hem doon at festes and at daunces.	That men do to them at festivities and at dances.
Swiche salutaciouns and contenaunces	Such salutations and courtesies
Passen as dooth a shadwe upon the wal;	Pass away as does a shadow upon the wall;
But wo is hym that payen moot for al!	But woe to him that must pay for all!
The sely housbonde, algate he moot paye,	The poor (hapless) husband, always he must pay,
He moot us clothe, and he moot us arraye,	He must clothe us, and he must adorn us
Al for his owene worshipe richely,	Richly, all for the sake of his own reputation,
In which array we daunce jolily.	In which finery we dance merrily.
And if that he noght may, par aventure,	And if it happens he can not pay,
Or ellis list no swich dispence endure,	Or else desires to endure no such expense,
But thynketh it is wasted and ylost,	But thinks it is wasted and lost,
Thanne moot another payen for oure cost,	Then another must pay for our costs,
Or lene us gold, and that is perilous.	Or lend us gold, and that is perilous.
This noble marchaunt heeld a worthy hous,	This noble merchant held a worthy house,
For which he hadde alday so greet repair	For which he always had so many guests
For his largesse, and for his wyf was fair,	Because of his generosity, and because his wife was fair,
That wonder is; but herkneth to my tale.	That it is a wonder; but listen to my tale.
Amonges alle his gestes, grete and smale,	Among all his guests, high ranking and low,
Ther was a monk, a fair man and a boold --	There was a monk, a handsome man and a bold one --
I trowe a thritty wynter he was oold --	I believe he was about thirty years old --
That evere in oon was drawynge to that place.	Who continually was drawing to that place.
This yonge monk, that was so fair of face,	This young monk, who had so handsome a face,
Aqueynted was so with the goode man,	Was so acquainted with the good man,
Sith that hir firste knoweliche bigan,	Since their first acquaintance began,
That in his hous as famulier was he	That in his house as intimate was he
As it is possible any freend to be.	As it is possible for any friend to be.
And for as muchel as this goode man,	And in view of the fact that this good man,
And eek this monk of which that I bigan,	And also this monk of whom I began (to tell),
Were bothe two yborn in o village,	The two of them, were both born in one village,
The monk hym claymeth as for cosynage,	The monk claims him as a kinsman,
And he agayn; he seith nat ones nay,	And he does the same; he not once says 'nay,'
But was as glad therof as fowel of day,	But was as glad of this as a fowl is of day,
For to his herte it was a greet plesaunce.	For to his heart it was a great pleasure.
Thus been they knyt with eterne alliaunce,	Thus are they knit with eternal alliance,
And ech of hem gan oother for t' assure	And each of them assured the other
Of bretherhede whil that hir lyf may dure.	Of brotherhood while their life may endure.
Free was daun John, and manly of dispence,	Free-handed was Don John, and generous in spending
As in that hous, and ful of diligence	In that house, and full of diligence
To doon plesaunce, and also greet costage.	To do pleasure, and also great expenditure.
He noght forgat to yeve the leeste page	He did not forget to give to the lowest ranking servant
In al that hous; but after hir degree,	In all that house; but according to their rank,
He yaf the lord, and sitthe al his meynee,	He gave to the lord, and then to all his household,
Whan that he cam, som manere honest thyng,	When he came, some sort of suitable gift,
For which they were as glad of his comyng	For which they were as glad of his coming
As fowel is fayn whan that the sonne up riseth.	As a fowl is happy when the sun rises up.
Na moore of this as now, for it suffiseth.	No more of this for now, for it suffices.
But so bifel, this marchant on a day	But as it happened, this merchant on a day
Shoop hym to make redy his array	Decided to make ready his preparations
Toward the toun of Brugges for to fare,	To travel to the town of Bruges ,
To byen there a porcioun of ware;	To buy there a quantity of merchandise;
For which he hath to Parys sent anon	For which he has to Paris sent immediately
A messager, and preyed hath daun John	A messenger, and has prayed Don John
That he sholde come to Seint-Denys to pleye	That he should come to Seint-Denis to visit
With hym and with his wyf a day or tweye,	With him and with his wife a day or two,
Er he to Brugges wente, in alle wise.	Before he went to Bruges, indeed.
This noble monk, of which I yow devyse,	This noble monk, of whom I tell you,
Hath of his abbot, as hym list, licence,	Has of his abbot, as he pleases, permission,
By cause he was a man of heigh prudence	Because he was a man of great prudence
And eek an officer, out for to ryde,	And also an officer, to ride out
To seen hir graunges and hire bernes wyde,	To see to their granges and their capacious barns,
And unto Seint-Denys he comth anon.	And he comes quickly to Seint-Denis.
Who was so welcome as my lord daun John,	Who was so welcome as my lord Don John,
Oure deere cosyn, ful of curteisye?	Our dear cousin, full of courtesy?
With hym broghte he a jubbe of malvesye,	With him he brought a jug of malmsey wine,
And eek another ful of fyn vernage,	And also another full of fine white wine,
And volatyl, as ay was his usage.	And game fowls, as always was his custom.
And thus I lete hem ete and drynke and pleye,	And thus I let them eat and drink and amuse themselves,
This marchant and this monk, a day or tweye.	This merchant and this monk, for a day or two.
The thridde day, this marchant up ariseth,	The third day, this merchant up arises,
And on his nedes sadly hym avyseth,	And seriously considers his business,
And up into his countour-hous gooth he	And he goes up into his counting-house
To rekene with hymself, wel may be,	To reckon with himself, as it well may be,
Of thilke yeer how that it with hym stood,	Of that same year how it stood with him,
And how that he despended hadde his good,	And how he had spent his funds,
And if that he encressed were or noon.	And if he had profited or not.
His bookes and his bagges many oon	His account books and his moneybags many a one
He leith biforn hym on his countyng-bord.	He lays before him on his counting-board.
Ful riche was his tresor and his hord,	His treasure and his hoard was very rich,
For which ful faste his countour-dore he shette;	For which he very tightly shut his counting house-door;
And eek he nolde that no man sholde hym lette	And also he wanted that no one should hinder him
Of his acountes, for the meene tyme;	From (making) his accounts, for the time being;
And thus he sit til it was passed pryme.	And thus he sits until it was past nine o'clock.
Daun John was rysen in the morwe also,	Don John had also risen in the morning,
And in the gardyn walketh to and fro,	And in the garden walks to and fro,
And hath his thynges seyd ful curteisly.	And has said his prayers very courteously.
This goode wyf cam walkynge pryvely	This good wife came walking alone
Into the gardyn, there he walketh softe,	Into the garden, where he walks quietly,
And hym saleweth, as she hath doon ofte.	And salutes him, as she has often done.
A mayde child cam in hire compaignye,	A maid servant came in her company,
Which as hir list she may governe and gye,	Whom she may govern and guide as she pleases,
For yet under the yerde was the mayde.	For the maid was yet subject to adult discipline.
"O deere cosyn myn, daun John," she sayde,	"Oh my dear cousin, Don John," she said,
"What eyleth yow so rathe for to ryse?"	"What ails you to rise so early?"
"Nece," quod he, "it oghte ynough suffise	"Niece," said he, "it ought enough suffice
Fyve houres for to slepe upon a nyght,	To sleep five hours upon a night,
But it were for an old appalled wight,	Unless it were for an old enfeebled creature,
As been thise wedded men, that lye and dare	As are these wedded men, that lie and doze
As in a fourme sit a wery hare,	As in his lair sits a weary hare,
Were al forstraught with houndes grete and smale.	Which is greatly distressed by hounds great and small.
But deere nece, why be ye so pale?	But dear niece, why are you so pale?
I trowe, certes, that oure goode man	I believe, certainly, that the head of our household
Hath yow laboured sith the nyght bigan	Has labored you since the night began
That yow were nede to resten hastily."	So much that you badly have need to rest."
And with that word he lough ful murily,	And with that word he laughed very merrily,
And of his owene thought he wax al reed.	And of his own thought he grew all red.
This faire wyf gan for to shake hir heed	This fair wife began to shake her head
And seyde thus, "Ye, God woot al," quod she.	And said thus, "Yea, God knows all," she said.
"Nay, cosyn myn, it stant nat so with me;	"Nay, my cousin, it stands not so with me;
For, by that God that yaf me soule and lyf,	For, by that God that gave me soul and life,
In al the reawme of France is ther no wyf	In all the realm of France there is no wife
That lasse lust hath to that sory pley.	That has less desire for that sorry play.
For I may synge `allas and weylawey	For I may sing `alas and alack
That I was born,' but to no wight," quod she,	That I was born,' but to no one," she said,
"Dar I nat telle how that it stant with me.	"Dare I tell how it stands with me.
Wherfore I thynke out of this land to wende,	Therefore I intend to go out of this land,
Or elles of myself to make an ende,	Or else to make an end of myself,
So ful am I of drede and eek of care."	I am so full of dread and also of care."
This monk bigan upon this wyf to stare,	This monk began to stare upon this wife,
And seyde, "Allas, my nece, God forbede	And said, "Alas, my niece, God forbid
That ye, for any sorwe or any drede,	That you, for any sorrow or any dread,
Fordo youreself; but telleth me youre grief.	Should destroy yourself; but tell me your grief.
Paraventure I may, in youre meschief,	Perhaps I can, in your unhappy situation,
Conseille or helpe; and therfore telleth me	Advise or help; and therefore tell me
Al youre anoy, for it shal been secree.	All your trouble, for it shall be secret.
For on my portehors I make an ooth	For on my prayer book I make an oath
That nevere in my lyf, for lief ne looth,	That never in my life, willing or unwilling,
Ne shal I of no conseil yow biwreye."	Shall I betray any of your secrets."
"The same agayn to yow," quod she, "I seye.	"The same in reply to you," she said, "I say.
By God and by this portehors I swere,	By God and by this prayer book I swear,
Though men me wolde al into pieces tere,	Though men would tear me all to pieces
Ne shal I nevere, for to goon to helle,	I shall never, even though I go to hell for it,
Biwreye a word of thyng that ye me telle,	Betray a word of anything that you tell me,
Nat for no cosynage ne alliance,	Not for any kinship nor alliance,
But verraily for love and affiance."	But truly for love and trust."
Thus been they sworn, and heerupon they kiste,	Thus they are sworn, and thereupon they kissed,
And ech of hem tolde oother what hem liste.	And each of them told the other what they pleased.
"Cosyn," quod she, "if that I hadde a space,	"Cousin," she said, "if I had a space of time,
As I have noon, and namely in this place,	As I have none, and especially in this place,
Thanne wolde I telle a legende of my lyf,	Then would I tell a legend of my life,
What I have suffred sith I was a wyf	What I have suffered since I was a wife
With myn housbonde, al be he youre cosyn."	Because of my husband, although he is your cousin."
"Nay," quod this monk, "by God and Seint Martyn,	"Nay," said this monk, "by God and Saint Martin,
He is na moore cosyn unto me	He is no more cousin unto me
Than is this leef that hangeth on the tree!	Than is this leaf that hangs on the tree!
I clepe hym so, by Seint Denys of Fraunce,	I call him so, by Saint Denis of France,
To have the moore cause of aqueyntaunce	To have the more opportunity of acquaintance
Of yow, which I have loved specially	With you, whom I have loved especially
Aboven alle wommen, sikerly.	Above all women, certainly.
This swere I yow on my professioun.	This I swear to you on my religious vows.
Telleth youre grief, lest that he come adoun;	Tell your grief, lest that he come down;
And hasteth yow, and gooth youre wey anon."	And hasten you, and go your way quickly."
Whan that Aprill with his shoures soote	When April with its sweet-smelling showers
The droghte of March hath perced to the roote,	Has pierced the drought of March to the root,
And bathed every veyne in swich licour	And bathed every vein (of the plants) in such liquid
Of which vertu engendred is the flour;	By which power the flower is created;
Whan Zephirus eek with his sweete breeth	When the West Wind also with its sweet breath,
Inspired hath in every holt and heeth	In every wood and field has breathed life into
The tendre croppes, and the yonge sonne	The tender new leaves, and the young sun
Hath in the Ram his half cours yronne,	Has run half its course in Aries,
And smale foweles maken melodye,	And small fowls make melody,
That slepen al the nyght with open ye	Those that sleep all the night with open eyes
(So priketh hem Nature in hir corages),	(So Nature incites them in their hearts),
Thanne longen folk to goon on pilgrimages,	Then folk long to go on pilgrimages,
And palmeres for to seken straunge strondes,	And professional pilgrims to seek foreign shores,
To ferne halwes, kowthe in sondry londes;	To distant shrines, known in various lands;
And specially from every shires ende	And specially from every shire's end
Of Engelond to Caunterbury they wende,	Of England to Canterbury they travel,
The hooly blisful martir for to seke,	To seek the holy blessed martyr,
That hem hath holpen whan that they were seeke.	Who helped them when they were sick.
Bifil that in that seson on a day,	It happened that in that season on one day,
In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay	In Southwark at the Tabard Inn as I lay
Redy to wenden on my pilgrymage	Ready to go on my pilgrimage
To Caunterbury with ful devout corage,	To Canterbury with a very devout spirit,
At nyght was come into that hostelrye	At night had come into that hostelry
Wel nyne and twenty in a compaignye	Well nine and twenty in a company
Of sondry folk, by aventure yfalle	Of various sorts of people, by chance fallen
In felaweshipe, and pilgrimes were they alle,	In fellowship, and they were all pilgrims,
That toward Caunterbury wolden ryde.	Who intended to ride toward Canterbury.
The chambres and the stables weren wyde,	The bedrooms and the stables were spacious,
And wel we weren esed atte beste.	And we were well accommodated in the best way.
And shortly, whan the sonne was to reste,	And in brief, when the sun was (gone) to rest,
So hadde I spoken with hem everichon	I had so spoken with everyone of them
That I was of hir felaweshipe anon,	That I was of their fellowship straightway,
And made forward erly for to ryse,	And made agreement to rise early,
To take oure wey ther as I yow devyse.	To take our way where I (will) tell you.
But nathelees, whil I have tyme and space,	But nonetheless, while I have time and opportunity,
Er that I ferther in this tale pace,	Before I proceed further in this tale,
Me thynketh it acordaunt to resoun	It seems to me in accord with reason
To telle yow al the condicioun	To tell you all the circumstances
Of ech of hem, so as it semed me,	Of each of them, as it seemed to me,
And whiche they weren, and of what degree,	And who they were, and of what social rank,
And eek in what array that they were inne;	And also what clothing that they were in;
And at a knyght than wol I first bigynne.	And at a knight then will I first begin.
A KNYGHT ther was, and that a worthy man,	A KNIGHT there was, and that (one was) a worthy man,
That fro the tyme that he first bigan	Who from the time that he first began
To riden out, he loved chivalrie,	To ride out, he loved chivalry,
Trouthe and honour, fredom and curteisie.	Fidelity and good reputation, generosity and courtesy.
Ful worthy was he in his lordes werre,	He was very worthy in his lord's war,
And therto hadde he riden, no man ferre,	And for that he had ridden, no man farther,
As wel in cristendom as in hethenesse,	As well in Christendom as in heathen lands,
And evere honoured for his worthynesse;	And (was) ever honored for his worthiness;
At Alisaundre he was whan it was wonne.	He was at Alexandria when it was won.
Ful ofte tyme he hadde the bord bigonne	He had sat very many times in the place of honor,
Aboven alle nacions in Pruce;	Above (knights of) all nations in Prussia;
In Lettow hadde he reysed and in Ruce,	He had campaigned in Lithuania and in Russia,
No Cristen man so ofte of his degree.	No Christian man of his rank so often.
In Gernade at the seege eek hadde he be	Also he had been in Grenada at the siege
Of Algezir, and riden in Belmarye.	Of Algeciras, and had ridden in Morocco.
At Lyeys was he and at Satalye,	He was at Ayash and at Atalia,
Whan they were wonne, and in the Grete See	When they were won, and in the Mediterranean
At many a noble armee hadde he be.	He had been at many a noble expedition.
At mortal batailles hadde he been fiftene,	He had been at fifteen mortal battles,
And foughten for oure feith at Tramyssene	And fought for our faith at Tlemcen
In lystes thries, and ay slayn his foo.	Three times in formal duels, and each time slain his foe.
This ilke worthy knyght hadde been also	This same worthy knight had also been
Somtyme with the lord of Palatye	At one time with the lord of Balat
Agayn another hethen in Turkye;	Against another heathen in Turkey;
And everemoore he hadde a sovereyn prys.	And evermore he had an outstanding reputation
And though that he were worthy, he was wys,	And although he was brave, he was prudent,
And of his port as meeke as is a mayde.	And of his deportment as meek as is a maid.
He nevere yet no vileynye ne sayde	He never yet said any rude word
In al his lyf unto no maner wight.	In all his life unto any sort of person.
He was a verray, parfit gentil knyght.	He was a truly perfect, noble knight.
But for to tellen yow of his array,	But to tell you of his clothing,
His hors were goode, but he was nat gay.	His horses were good, but he was not gaily dressed.
Of fustian he wered a gypon	He wore a tunic of coarse cloth
Al bismotered with his habergeon,	All stained (with rust) by his coat of mail,
For he was late ycome from his viage,	For he was recently come (back) from his expedition,
And wente for to doon his pilgrymage.	And went to do his pilgrimage.
With hym ther was his sone, a yong SQUIER,	With him there was his son, a young SQUIRE,
A lovyere and a lusty bacheler,	A lover and a lively bachelor,
With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse.	With locks curled as if they had been laid in a curler.
Of twenty yeer of age he was, I gesse.	He was twenty years of age, I guess.
Of his stature he was of evene lengthe,	Of his stature he was of moderate height,
And wonderly delyvere, and of greet strengthe.	And wonderfully agile, and of great strength.
And he hadde been somtyme in chyvachie	And he had been for a time on a cavalry expedition
In Flaundres, in Artoys, and Pycardie,	In Flanders, in Artois, and Picardy,
And born hym weel, as of so litel space,	And conducted himself well, for so little a space of time,
In hope to stonden in his lady grace.	In hope to stand in his lady's good graces.
Embrouded was he, as it were a meede	He was embroidered, as if it were a mead
Al ful of fresshe floures, whyte and reede.	All full of fresh flowers, white and red.
Syngynge he was, or floytynge, al the day;	Singing he was, or fluting, all the day;
He was as fressh as is the month of May.	He was as fresh as is the month of May.
Short was his gowne, with sleves longe and wyde.	His gown was short, with long and wide sleeves.
Wel koude he sitte on hors and faire ryde.	He well knew how to sit on horse and handsomely ride.
He koude songes make and wel endite,	He knew how to make songs and well compose (the words),
Juste and eek daunce, and weel purtreye and write.	Joust and also dance, and well draw and write.
So hoote he lovede that by nyghtertale	He loved so passionately that at nighttime
He sleep namoore than dooth a nyghtyngale.	He slept no more than does a nightingale.
Curteis he was, lowely, and servysable,	Courteous he was, humble, and willing to serve,
And carf biforn his fader at the table.	And carved before his father at the table.
A YEMAN hadde he and servantz namo	He (the Knight) had A YEOMAN and no more servants
At that tyme, for hym liste ride so,	At that time, for it pleased him so to travel,
And he was clad in cote and hood of grene.	And he (the yeoman) was clad in coat and hood of green.
A sheef of pecok arwes, bright and kene,	A sheaf of peacock arrows, bright and keen,
Under his belt he bar ful thriftily	He carried under his belt very properly
(Wel koude he dresse his takel yemanly;	(He well knew how to care for his equipment as a yeoman should;
His arwes drouped noght with fetheres lowe),	His arrows did not fall short because of drooping feathers),
And in his hand he baar a myghty bowe.	And in his hand he carried a mighty bow.
A not heed hadde he, with a broun visage.	He had a close-cropped head, with a brown face.
Of wodecraft wel koude he al the usage.	He well knew all the practice of woodcraft.
Upon his arm he baar a gay bracer,	He wore an elegant archer's wrist-guard upon his arm,
And by his syde a swerd and a bokeler,	And by his side a sword and a small shield,
And on that oother syde a gay daggere	And on that other side an elegant dagger
Harneised wel and sharp as point of spere;	Well ornamented and sharp as the point of a spear;
A Cristopher on his brest of silver sheene.	A Christopher-medal of bright silver on his breast.
An horn he bar, the bawdryk was of grene;	He carried a horn, the shoulder strap was green;
A forster was he, soothly, as I gesse.	He was a forester, truly, as I guess.
Ther was also a Nonne, a PRIORESSE,	There was also a Nun, a PRIORESS,
That of hir smylyng was ful symple and coy;	Who was very simple and modest in her smiling;
Hire gretteste ooth was but by Seinte Loy;	Her greatest oath was but by Saint Loy;
And she was cleped madame Eglentyne.	And she was called Madam Eglantine.
Ful weel she soong the service dyvyne,	She sang the divine service very well,
Entuned in hir nose ful semely;	Intoned in her nose in a very polite manner;
And Frenssh she spak ful faire and fetisly,	And she spoke French very well and elegantly,
After the scole of Stratford atte Bowe,	In the manner of Stratford at the Bow,
For Frenssh of Parys was to hire unknowe.	For French of Paris was to her unknown.
At mete wel ytaught was she with alle;	At meals she was well taught indeed;
She leet no morsel from hir lippes falle,	She let no morsel fall from her lips,
Ne wette hir fyngres in hir sauce depe;	Nor wet her fingers deep in her sauce;
Wel koude she carie a morsel and wel kepe	She well knew how to carry a morsel (to her mouth) and take good care
That no drope ne fille upon hire brest.	That no drop fell upon her breast.
In curteisie was set ful muchel hir lest.	Her greatest pleasure was in good manners.
Hir over-lippe wyped she so clene	She wiped her upper lip so clean
That in hir coppe ther was no ferthyng sene	That in her cup there was seen no tiny bit
Of grece, whan she dronken hadde hir draughte.	Of grease, when she had drunk her drink.
Ful semely after hir mete she raughte.	She reached for her food in a very seemly manner.
And sikerly she was of greet desport,	And surely she was of excellent deportment,
And ful plesaunt, and amyable of port,	And very pleasant, and amiable in demeanor,
And peyned hire to countrefete cheere	And she took pains to imitate the manners
Of court, and to been estatlich of manere,	Of court, and to be dignified in behavior,
And to ben holden digne of reverence.	And to be considered worthy of reverence.
But for to speken of hire conscience,	But to speak of her moral sense,
She was so charitable and so pitous	She was so charitable and so compassionate
She wolde wepe, if that she saugh a mous	She would weep, if she saw a mouse
Kaught in a trappe, if it were deed or bledde.	Caught in a trap, if it were dead or bled.
Of smale houndes hadde she that she fedde	She had some small hounds that she fed
With rosted flessh, or milk and wastel-breed.	With roasted meat, or milk and fine white bread.
But soore wepte she if oon of hem were deed,	But sorely she wept if one of them were dead,
Or if men smoot it with a yerde smerte;	Or if someone smote it smartly with a stick;
And al was conscience and tendre herte.	And all was feeling and tender heart.
Ful semyly hir wympul pynched was,	Her wimple was pleated in a very seemly manner,
Hir nose tretys, hir eyen greye as glas,	Her nose well formed, her eyes gray as glass,
Hir mouth ful smal, and therto softe and reed.	Her mouth very small, and moreover soft and red.
But sikerly she hadde a fair forheed;	But surely she had a fair forehead;
It was almoost a spanne brood, I trowe;	It was almost nine inches broad, I believe;
For, hardily, she was nat undergrowe.	For, certainly, she was not undergrown.
Ful fetys was hir cloke, as I was war.	Her cloak was very well made , as I was aware.
Of smal coral aboute hire arm she bar	About her arm she bore of small coral
A peire of bedes, gauded al with grene,	A set of beads, adorned with large green beads,
And theron heng a brooch of gold ful sheene,	And thereon hung a brooch of very bright gold,
On which ther was first write a crowned A,	On which there was first written an A with a crown,
And after Amor vincit omnia.	And after "Love conquers all."
Another NONNE with hire hadde she,	She had another NUN with her,
That was hir chapeleyne, and preestes thre.	Who was her secretary, and three priests.
A MONK ther was, a fair for the maistrie,	There was a MONK, an extremely fine one,
An outridere, that lovede venerie,	An outrider (a monk with business outside the monastery), who loved hunting,
A manly man, to been an abbot able.	A virile man, qualified to be an abbot.
Ful many a deyntee hors hadde he in stable,	He had very many fine horses in his stable,
And whan he rood, men myghte his brydel heere	And when he rode, one could hear his bridle
Gynglen in a whistlynge wynd als cleere	Jingle in a whistling wind as clear
And eek as loude as dooth the chapel belle	And also as loud as does the chapel belle
Ther as this lord was kepere of the celle.	Where this lord was prior of the subordinate monastery.
The reule of Seint Maure or of Seint Beneit --	The rule of Saint Maurus or of Saint Benedict --
By cause that it was old and somdel streit	Because it was old and somewhat strict
This ilke Monk leet olde thynges pace,	This same Monk let old things pass away,
And heeld after the newe world the space.	And followed the broader customs of modern times.
He yaf nat of that text a pulled hen,	He gave not a plucked hen for that text
That seith that hunters ben nat hooly men,	That says that hunters are not holy men,
Ne that a monk, whan he is recchelees,	Nor that a monk, when he is heedless of rules,
Is likned til a fissh that is waterlees --	Is like a fish that is out of water --
This is to seyn, a monk out of his cloystre.	This is to say, a monk out of his cloister.
But thilke text heeld he nat worth an oystre;	But he considered that same text not worth an oyster;
And I seyde his opinion was good.	And I said his opinion was good.
What sholde he studie and make hymselven wood,	Why should he study and make himself crazy,
Upon a book in cloystre alwey to poure,	Always to pore upon a book in the cloister,
Or swynken with his handes, and laboure,	Or work with his hands, and labor,
As Austyn bit? How shal the world be served?	As Augustine commands? How shall the world be served?
Lat Austyn have his swynk to hym reserved!	Let Augustine have his work reserved to him!
Therfore he was a prikasour aright:	Therefore he was indeed a vigorous horseman:
Grehoundes he hadde as swift as fowel in flight;	He had greyhounds as swift as fowl in flight;
Of prikyng and of huntyng for the hare	Of tracking and of hunting for the hare
Was al his lust, for no cost wolde he spare.	Was all his pleasure, by no means would he refrain from it.
I seigh his sleves purfiled at the hond	I saw his sleeves lined at the hand
With grys, and that the fyneste of a lond;	With squirrel fur, and that the finest in the land;
And for to festne his hood under his chyn,	And to fasten his hood under his chin,
He hadde of gold ywroght a ful curious pyn;	He had a very skillfully made pin of gold;
A love-knotte in the gretter ende ther was.	There was an elaborate knot in the larger end.
His heed was balled, that shoon as any glas,	His head was bald, which shone like any glass,
And eek his face, as he hadde been enoynt.	And his face did too, as if he had been rubbed with oil.
He was a lord ful fat and in good poynt;	He was a very plump lord and in good condition;
His eyen stepe, and rollynge in his heed,	His eyes were prominent, and rolling in his head,
That stemed as a forneys of a leed;	Which gleamed like a furnace under a cauldron;
His bootes souple, his hors in greet estaat.	His boots supple, his horse in excellent condition.
Now certeinly he was a fair prelaat;	Now certainly he was a handsome ecclesiastical dignitary;
He was nat pale as a forpyned goost.	He was not pale as a tormented spirit.
A fat swan loved he best of any roost.	A fat swan loved he best of any roast.
His palfrey was as broun as is a berye.	His saddle horse was as brown as is a berry.
A FRERE ther was, a wantowne and a merye,	There was a FRIAR, a pleasure-loving and merry one,
A lymytour, a ful solempne man.	A limiter (with an assigned territory), a very solemn man.
In alle the ordres foure is noon that kan	In all the four orders of friars is no one that knows
So muchel of daliaunce and fair langage.	So much of sociability and elegant speech.
He hadde maad ful many a mariage	He had made very many a marriage
Of yonge wommen at his owene cost.	Of young women at his own cost.
Unto his ordre he was a noble post.	He was a noble supporter of his order.
Ful wel biloved and famulier was he	Very well beloved and familiar was he
With frankeleyns over al in his contree,	With landowners every where in his country,
And eek with worthy wommen of the toun;	And also with worthy women of the town;
For he hadde power of confessioun,	For he had power of confession,
As seyde hymself, moore than a curat,	As he said himself, more than a parish priest,
For of his ordre he was licenciat.	For he was licensed by his order.
Ful swetely herde he confessioun,	He heard confession very sweetly,
And plesaunt was his absolucioun:	And his absolution was pleasant:
He was an esy man to yeve penaunce,	He was a lenient man in giving penance,
Ther as he wiste to have a good pitaunce.	Where he knew he would have a good gift.
For unto a povre ordre for to yive	For to give to a poor order (of friars)
Is signe that a man is wel yshryve;	Is a sign that a man is well confessed;
For if he yaf, he dorste make avaunt,	For if he gave, he (the friar) dared to assert,
He wiste that a man was repentaunt;	He knew that a man was repentant;
For many a man so hard is of his herte,	For many a man is so hard in his heart,
He may nat wepe, althogh hym soore smerte.	He can not weep, although he painfully suffers.
Therfore in stede of wepynge and preyeres	Therefore instead of weeping and prayers
Men moote yeve silver to the povre freres.	One may give silver to the poor friars.
His typet was ay farsed ful of knyves	His hood was always stuffed full of knives
And pynnes, for to yeven faire wyves.	And pins, to give to fair wives.
And certeinly he hadde a murye note:	And certainly he had a merry voice:
Wel koude he synge and pleyen on a rote;	He well knew how to sing and play on a rote (string instrument);
Of yeddynges he baar outrely the pris.	He absolutely took the prize for reciting ballads.
His nekke whit was as the flour-de-lys;	His neck was white as a lily flower;
Therto he strong was as a champioun.	Furthermore he was strong as a champion fighter.
He knew the tavernes wel in every toun	He knew the taverns well in every town
And everich hostiler and tappestere	And every innkeeper and barmaid
Bet than a lazar or a beggestere,	Better than a leper or a beggar-woman,
For unto swich a worthy man as he	For unto such a worthy man as he
Acorded nat, as by his facultee,	It was not suitable, in view of his official position,
To have with sike lazars aqueyntaunce.	To have acquaintance with sick lepers.
It is nat honest; it may nat avaunce,	It is not respectable; it can not be profitable,
For to deelen with no swich poraille,	To deal with any such poor people,
But al with riche and selleres of vitaille.	But all with rich people and sellers of victuals.
And over al, ther as profit sholde arise,	And every where, where profit should arise,
Curteis he was and lowely of servyse;	He was courteous and graciously humble;
Ther nas no man nowher so vertuous.	There was no man anywhere so capable (of such work).
He was the beste beggere in his hous;	He was the best beggar in his house;
And yaf a certeyn ferme for the graunt;	And he gave a certain fee for his grant (of begging rights);
Noon of his bretheren cam ther in his haunt;	None of his brethren came there in his territory;
For thogh a wydwe hadde noght a sho,	For though a widow had not a shoe,
So plesaunt was his "In principio,"	So pleasant was his "In the beginning,"
Yet wolde he have a ferthyng, er he wente.	Yet he would have a farthing, before he went away.
His purchas was wel bettre than his rente.	His total profit was much more than his proper income.
And rage he koude, as it were right a whelp.	And he knew how to frolic, as if he were indeed a pup.
In love-dayes ther koude he muchel help,	He knew how to be much help on days for resolving disputes,
For ther he was nat lyk a cloysterer	For there he was not like a cloistered monk
With a thredbare cope, as is a povre scoler,	With a threadbare cope, like a poor scholar,
But he was lyk a maister or a pope.	But he was like a master of arts or a pope.
Of double worstede was his semycope,	Of wide (expensive) cloth was his short cloak,
That rounded as a belle out of the presse.	Which was round as a bell fresh from the clothespress.
Somwhat he lipsed, for his wantownesse,	Somewhat he lisped, for his affectation,
To make his Englissh sweete upon his tonge;	To make his English sweet upon his tongue;
And in his harpyng, whan that he hadde songe,	And in his harping, when he had sung,
His eyen twynkled in his heed aryght	His eyes twinkled in his head exactly
As doon the sterres in the frosty nyght.	As do the stars in the frosty night.
This worthy lymytour was cleped Huberd.	This worthy friar was called Huberd.
A MARCHANT was ther with a forked berd,	There was a MERCHANT with a forked beard,
In mottelee, and hye on horse he sat;	Wearing parti-colored cloth, and proudly he sat on his horse;
Upon his heed a Flaundryssh bever hat,	Upon his head (he wore a) Flemish beaver hat,
His bootes clasped faire and fetisly.	His boots were buckled handsomely and elegantly.
His resons he spak ful solempnely,	His opinions he spoke very solemnly,
Sownynge alwey th' encrees of his wynnyng.	Concerning always the increase of his profits.
He wolde the see were kept for any thyng	He wanted the sea to be guarded at all costs
Bitwixe Middelburgh and Orewelle.	Between Middelburgh (Holland) and Orwell (England).
Wel koude he in eschaunge sheeldes selle.	He well knew how to deal in foreign currencies.
This worthy man ful wel his wit bisette:	This worthy man employed his wit very well:
Ther wiste no wight that he was in dette,	There was no one who knew that he was in debt,
So estatly was he of his governaunce	He was so dignified in managing his affairs
With his bargaynes and with his chevyssaunce.	With his buying and selling and with his financial deals.
For sothe he was a worthy man with alle,	Truly, he was a worthy man indeed,
But, sooth to seyn, I noot how men hym calle.	But, to say the truth, I do not know what men call him.
A CLERK ther was of Oxenford also,	There was also a CLERK (scholar) from Oxford,
That unto logyk hadde longe ygo.	Who long before had begun the study of logic.
As leene was his hors as is a rake,	His horse was as lean as is a rake,
And he nas nat right fat, I undertake,	And he was not very fat, I affirm,
But looked holwe, and therto sobrely.	But looked emaciated, and moreover abstemious.
Ful thredbare was his overeste courtepy,	His short overcoat was very threadbare,
For he hadde geten hym yet no benefice,	For he had not yet obtained an ecclesiastical living,
Ne was so worldly for to have office.	Nor was he worldly enough to take secular employment.
For hym was levere have at his beddes heed	For he would rather have at the head of his bed
Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed,	Twenty books, bound in black or red,
Of Aristotle and his philosophie	Of Aristotle and his philosophy
Than robes riche, or fithele, or gay sautrie.	Than rich robes, or a fiddle, or an elegant psaltery.
But al be that he was a philosophre,	But even though he was a philosopher,
Yet hadde he but litel gold in cofre;	Nevertheless he had but little gold in his strongbox;
But al that he myghte of his freendes hente,	But all that he could get from his friends,
On bookes and on lernynge he it spente,	He spent on books and on learning,
And bisily gan for the soules preye	And diligently did pray for the souls
Of hem that yaf hym wherwith to scoleye.	Of those who gave him the wherewithal to attend the schools.
Of studie took he moost cure and moost heede.	He took most care and paid most heed to study.
Noght o word spak he moore than was neede,	He spoke not one word more than was needed,
And that was seyd in forme and reverence,	And that was said with due formality and respect,
And short and quyk and ful of hy sentence;	And short and lively and full of elevated content;
Sownynge in moral vertu was his speche,	His speech was consonant with moral virtue,
And gladly wolde he lerne and gladly teche.	And gladly would he learn and gladly teach.
A SERGEANT OF THE LAWE, war and wys,	A SERGEANT OF THE LAW (high-ranking attorney), prudent and wise,
That often hadde been at the Parvys,	Who often had been at the Porch of St. Paul's (where lawyers gather)
Ther was also, ful riche of excellence.	Was also there, very rich in superior qualities.
Discreet he was and of greet reverence --	He was judicious and of great dignity --
He semed swich, his wordes weren so wise.	He seemed such, his words were so wise.
Justice he was ful often in assise,	He was very often a judge in the court of assizes,
By patente and by pleyn commissioun.	By royal appointment and with full jurisdiction.
For his science and for his heigh renoun,	For his knowledge and for his excellent reputation,
Of fees and robes hadde he many oon.	He had many grants of yearly income.
So greet a purchasour was nowher noon:	There was nowhere so great a land-buyer:
Al was fee symple to hym in effect;	In fact, all was unrestricted possession to him;
His purchasyng myghte nat been infect.	His purchasing could not be invalidated.
Nowher so bisy a man as he ther nas,	There was nowhere so busy a man as he,
And yet he semed bisier than he was.	And yet he seemed busier than he was.
In termes hadde he caas and doomes alle	He had in Year Books all the cases and decisions
That from the tyme of kyng William were falle.	That from the time of king William have occurred.
Therto he koude endite and make a thyng,	Furthermore, he knew how to compose and draw up a legal document,
Ther koude no wight pynche at his writyng;	So that no one could find a flaw in his writing;
And every statut koude he pleyn by rote.	And he knew every statute completely by heart.
He rood but hoomly in a medlee cote,	He rode but simply in a parti-colored coat,
Girt with a ceint of silk, with barres smale;	Girded with a belt of silk, with small stripes;
Of his array telle I no lenger tale.	I tell no longer tale of his clothing.
A FRANKELEYN was in his compaignye.	A FRANKLIN was in his company.
Whit was his berd as is the dayesye;	His beard was white as a daisy;
Of his complexioun he was sangwyn.	As to his temperament, he was dominated by the humor blood.
Wel loved he by the morwe a sop in wyn;	He well loved a bit of bread dipped in wine in the morning;
To lyven in delit was evere his wone,	His custom was always to live in delight,
For he was Epicurus owene sone,	For he was Epicurus' own son,
That heeld opinioun that pleyn delit	Who held the opinion that pure pleasure
Was verray felicitee parfit.	Was truly perfect happiness.
An housholdere, and that a greet, was he;	He was a householder, and a great one at that;
Seint Julian he was in his contree.	He was Saint Julian (patron of hospitality) in his country.
His breed, his ale, was alweys after oon;	His bread, his ale, was always of the same (good) quality;
A bettre envyned man was nowher noon.	Nowhere was there any man better stocked with wine.
Withoute bake mete was nevere his hous,	His house was never without baked pies
Of fissh and flessh, and that so plentevous	Of fish and meat, and that so plentiful
It snewed in his hous of mete and drynke;	That in his house it snowed with food and drink;
Of alle deyntees that men koude thynke,	Of all the dainties that men could imagine,
After the sondry sesons of the yeer,	In accord with the various seasons of the year,
So chaunged he his mete and his soper.	So he varied his midday meal and his supper.
Ful many a fat partrich hadde he in muwe,	He had very many fat partridges in pens,
And many a breem and many a luce in stuwe.	And many a bream and many a pike in his fish pond.
Wo was his cook but if his sauce were	Woe was his cook unless his sauce was
Poynaunt and sharp, and redy al his geere.	Hotly spiced and sharp, and ready all his cooking equipment.
His table dormant in his halle alway	In his hall his dining table always
Stood redy covered al the longe day.	Stood covered (with table cloth) and ready all the long day.
At sessiouns ther was he lord and sire;	He presided as lord and sire at court sessions;
Ful ofte tyme he was knyght of the shire.	He was a member of parliament many times.
An anlaas and a gipser al of silk	A dagger and a purse all of silk
Heeng at his girdel, whit as morne milk.	Hung at his belt, white as morning milk.
A shirreve hadde he been, and a contour.	He had been a sheriff, and an auditor of taxes.
Was nowher swich a worthy vavasour.	There was nowhere such a worthy landowner.
AN HABERDASSHERE and a CARPENTER,	A HABERDASHER and a CARPENTER,
A WEBBE, a DYERE, and a TAPYCER --	A WEAVER, a DYER, and a TAPESTRY-MAKER --
And they were clothed alle in o lyveree	And they were all clothed in one livery
Of a solempne and a greet fraternitee.	Of a solemn and a great parish guild.
Ful fressh and newe hir geere apiked was;	Their equipment was adorned all freshly and new;
Hir knyves were chaped noght with bras	Their knives were not mounted with brass
But al with silver, wroght ful clene and weel,	But entirely with silver, wrought very neatly and well,
Hire girdles and hir pouches everydeel.	Their belts and their purses every bit.
Wel semed ech of hem a fair burgeys	Each of them well seemed a solid citizen
To sitten in a yeldehalle on a deys.	To sit on a dais in a city hall.
Everich, for the wisdom that he kan,	Every one of them, for the wisdom that he knows,
Was shaply for to been an alderman.	Was suitable to be an alderman.
For catel hadde they ynogh and rente,	For they had enough possessions and income,
And eek hir wyves wolde it wel assente;	And also their wives would well assent to it;
And elles certeyn were they to blame.	And otherwise certainly they would be to blame.
It is ful fair to been ycleped "madame,"	It is very fine to be called "my lady,"
And goon to vigilies al bifore,	And go to feasts on holiday eves heading the procession,
And have a mantel roialliche ybore.	And have a gown with a train royally carried.
A COOK they hadde with hem for the nones	A COOK they had with them for the occasion
To boille the chiknes with the marybones,	To boil the chickens with the marrow bones,
And poudre-marchant tart and galyngale.	And tart poudre-marchant and galingale (spices).
Wel koude he knowe a draughte of Londoun ale.	He well knew how to judge a draft of London ale.
He koude rooste, and sethe, and broille, and frye,	He knew how to roast, and boil, and broil, and fry,
Maken mortreux, and wel bake a pye.	Make stews, and well bake a pie.
But greet harm was it, as it thoughte me,	But it was a great harm, as it seemed to me,
That on his shyne a mormal hadde he.	That he had an open sore on his shin.
For blankmanger, that made he with the beste.	As for white pudding, he made that of the best quality.
A SHIPMAN was ther, wonynge fer by weste;	A SHIPMAN was there, dwelling far in the west;
For aught I woot, he was of Dertemouthe.	For all I know, he was from Dartmouth.
He rood upon a rouncy, as he kouthe,	He rode upon a cart horse, insofar as he knew how,
In a gowne of faldyng to the knee.	In a gown of woolen cloth (that reached) to the knee.
A daggere hangynge on a laas hadde he	He had a dagger hanging on a cord
Aboute his nekke, under his arm adoun.	About his neck, down under his arm.
The hoote somer hadde maad his hewe al broun;	The hot summer had made his hue all brown;
And certeinly he was a good felawe.	And certainly he was a boon companion.
Ful many a draughte of wyn had he ydrawe	He had drawn very many a draft of wine
Fro Burdeux-ward, whil that the chapman sleep.	While coming from Bordeaux, while the merchant slept.
Of nyce conscience took he no keep.	He had no concern for a scrupulous conscience.
If that he faught and hadde the hyer hond,	If he fought and had the upper hand,
By water he sente hem hoom to every lond.	He sent them home by water to every land (they walked the plank).
But of his craft to rekene wel his tydes,	But of his skill to reckon well his tides,
His stremes, and his daungers hym bisides,	His currents, and his perils near at hand,
His herberwe, and his moone, his lodemenage,	His harbors, and positions of his moon, his navigation,
Ther nas noon swich from Hulle to Cartage.	There was none other such from Hull to Cartagena (Spain).
Hardy he was and wys to undertake;	He was bold and prudent in his undertakings;
With many a tempest hadde his berd been shake.	His beard had been shaken by many a tempest.
He knew alle the havenes, as they were,	He knew all the harbors, how they were,
Fro Gootlond to the cape of Fynystere,	From Gotland to the Cape of Finisterre,
And every cryke in Britaigne and in Spayne.	And every inlet in Brittany and in Spain.
His barge ycleped was the Maudelayne.	His ship was called the Maudelayne.
With us ther was a DOCTOUR OF PHISIK;	With us there was a DOCTOR OF MEDICINE
In al this world ne was ther noon hym lik,	In all this world there was no one like him,
To speke of phisik and of surgerye,	To speak of medicine and of surgery,
For he was grounded in astronomye.	For he was instructed in astronomy.
He kepte his pacient a ful greet deel	He took care of his patient very many times
In houres by his magyk natureel.	In (astronomically suitable) hours by (use of) his natural science.
Wel koude he fortunen the ascendent	He well knew how to calculate the planetary position
Of his ymages for his pacient.	Of his astronomical talismans for his patient.
He knew the cause of everich maladye,	He knew the cause of every malady,
Were it of hoot, or coold, or moyste, or drye,	Were it of hot, or cold, or moist, or dry elements,
And where they engendred, and of what humour.	And where they were engendered, and by what bodily fluid.
He was a verray, parfit praktisour:	He was a truly, perfect practitioner:
The cause yknowe, and of his harm the roote,	The cause known, and the source of his (patient's) harm,
Anon he yaf the sike man his boote.	Straightway he gave the sick man his remedy.
Ful redy hadde he his apothecaries	He had his apothecaries all ready
To sende hym drogges and his letuaries,	To send him drugs and his electuaries,
For ech of hem made oother for to wynne --	For each of them made the other to profit --
Hir frendshipe nas nat newe to bigynne.	Their friendship was not recently begun.
Wel knew he the olde Esculapius,	He well knew the old Aesculapius,
And Deyscorides, and eek Rufus,	And Dioscorides, and also Rufus,
Olde Ypocras, Haly, and Galyen,	Old Hippocrates, Haly, and Galen,
Serapion, Razis, and Avycen,	Serapion, Rhazes, and Avicenna,
Averrois, Damascien, and Constantyn,	Averroes, John the Damascan, and Constantine,
Bernard, and Gatesden, and Gilbertyn.	Bernard, and Gaddesden, and Gilbertus.
Of his diete mesurable was he,	He was moderate in his diet,
For it was of no superfluitee,	For it was of no excess,
But of greet norissyng and digestible.	But greatly nourishing and digestible.
His studie was but litel on the Bible.	His study was but little on the Bible.
In sangwyn and in pers he clad was al,	He was clad all in red and in blue,
Lyned with taffata and with sendal.	Lined with taffeta and with silk.
And yet he was but esy of dispence;	And yet he was moderate in spending;
He kepte that he wan in pestilence.	He kept what he earned in (times of) plague.
For gold in phisik is a cordial,	Since in medicine gold is a restorative for the heart,
Therefore he lovede gold in special.	Therefore he loved gold in particular.
A good WIF was ther OF biside BATHE,	There was a good WIFE OF beside BATH,
But she was somdel deef, and that was scathe.	But she was somewhat deaf, and that was a pity.
Of clooth-makyng she hadde swich an haunt	She had such a skill in cloth-making
She passed hem of Ypres and of Gaunt.	She surpassed them of Ypres and of Ghent.
In al the parisshe wif ne was ther noon	In all the parish there was no wife
That to the offrynge bifore hire sholde goon;	Who should go to the Offering before her;
And if ther dide, certeyn so wrooth was she	And if there did, certainly she was so angry
That she was out of alle charitee.	That she was out of all charity (love for her neighbor).
Hir coverchiefs ful fyne weren of ground;	Her kerchiefs were very fine in texture;
I dorste swere they weyeden ten pound	I dare swear they weighed ten pound
That on a Sonday weren upon hir heed.	That on a Sunday were upon her head.
Hir hosen weren of fyn scarlet reed,	Her stockings were of fine scarlet red,
Ful streite yteyd, and shoes ful moyste and newe.	Very closely laced, and shoes very supple and new.
Boold was hir face, and fair, and reed of hewe.	Bold was her face, and fair, and red of hue.
She was a worthy womman al hir lyve:	She was a worthy woman all her life:
Housbondes at chirche dore she hadde fyve,	She had (married) five husbands at the church door,
Withouten oother compaignye in youthe --	Not counting other company in youth --
But thereof nedeth nat to speke as nowthe.	But there is no need to speak of that right now.
And thries hadde she been at Jerusalem;	And she had been three times at Jerusalem;
She hadde passed many a straunge strem;	She had passed many a foreign sea;
At Rome she hadde been, and at Boloigne,	She had been at Rome, and at Boulogne,
In Galice at Seint-Jame, and at Coloigne.	In Galicia at Saint-James (of Compostella), and at Cologne.
She koude muchel of wandrynge by the weye.	She knew much about wandering by the way.
Gat-tothed was she, soothly for to seye.	She had teeth widely set apart, truly to say.
Upon an amblere esily she sat,	She sat easily upon a pacing horse,
Ywympled wel, and on hir heed an hat	Wearing a large wimple, and on her head a hat
As brood as is a bokeler or a targe;	As broad as a buckler or a shield;
A foot-mantel aboute hir hipes large,	An overskirt about her large hips,
And on hir feet a paire of spores sharpe.	And on her feet a pair of sharp spurs.
In felaweshipe wel koude she laughe and carpe.	In fellowship she well knew how to laugh and chatter.
Of remedies of love she knew per chaunce,	She knew, as it happened, about remedies for love
For she koude of that art the olde daunce.	For she knew the old dance (tricks of the trade) of that art.
A good man was ther of religioun,	A good man was there of religion,
And was a povre PERSOUN OF A TOUN,	And (he) was a poor PARSON OF A TOWN,
But riche he was of hooly thoght and werk.	But he was rich in holy thought and work.
He was also a lerned man, a clerk,	He was also a learned man, a scholar,
That Cristes gospel trewely wolde preche;	Who would preach Christ's gospel truly;
His parisshens devoutly wolde he teche.	He would devoutly teach his parishioners.
Benygne he was, and wonder diligent,	He was gracious, and wonderfully diligent,
And in adversitee ful pacient,	And very patient in adversity,
And swich he was ypreved ofte sithes.	And such he was proven many times.
Ful looth were hym to cursen for his tithes,	He was very reluctant to excommunicate for (nonpayment of) his tithes,
But rather wolde he yeven, out of doute,	But rather would he give, there is no doubt,
Unto his povre parisshens aboute	Unto his poor parishioners about
Of his offryng and eek of his substaunce.	Some of his offering (received at mass) and also some of his income.
He koude in litel thyng have suffisaunce.	He knew how to have sufficiency in few possessions.
Wyd was his parisshe, and houses fer asonder,	His parish was wide, and houses far apart,
But he ne lefte nat, for reyn ne thonder,	But he did not omit, for rain nor thunder,
In siknesse nor in meschief to visite	In sickness or in trouble to visit
The ferreste in his parisshe, muche and lite,	Those living farthest away in his parish, high-ranking and low,
Upon his feet, and in his hand a staf.	Going by foot, and in his hand a staff.
This noble ensample to his sheep he yaf,	He gave this noble example to his sheep,
That first he wroghte, and afterward he taughte.	That first he wrought, and afterward he taught.
Out of the gospel he tho wordes caughte,	He took those words out of the gospel,
And this figure he added eek therto,	And this metaphor he added also to that,
That if gold ruste, what shal iren do?	That if gold rust, what must iron do?
For if a preest be foul, on whom we truste,	For if a priest, on whom we trust, should be foul
No wonder is a lewed man to ruste;	It is no wonder for a layman to go bad;
And shame it is, if a prest take keep,	And it is a shame, if a priest is concerned:
A shiten shepherde and a clene sheep.	A shit-stained shepherd and a clean sheep.
Wel oghte a preest ensample for to yive,	Well ought a priest to give an example,
By his clennesse, how that his sheep sholde lyve.	By his purity, how his sheep should live.
He sette nat his benefice to hyre	He did not rent out his benefice (ecclesiastical living)
And leet his sheep encombred in the myre	And leave his sheep encumbered in the mire
And ran to Londoun unto Seinte Poules	And run to London unto Saint Paul's
To seken hym a chaunterie for soules,	To seek an appointment as a chantry priest (praying for a patron)
Or with a bretherhed to been withholde;	Or to be hired (as a chaplain) by a guild;
But dwelte at hoom, and kepte wel his folde,	But dwelt at home, and kept well his sheep fold (parish),
So that the wolf ne made it nat myscarie;	So that the wolf did not make it go wrong;
He was a shepherde and noght a mercenarie.	He was a shepherd and not a hireling.
And though he hooly were and vertuous,	And though he was holy and virtuous,
He was to synful men nat despitous,	He was not scornful to sinful men,
Ne of his speche daungerous ne digne,	Nor domineering nor haughty in his speech,
But in his techyng discreet and benygne.	But in his teaching courteous and kind.
To drawen folk to hevene by fairnesse,	To draw folk to heaven by gentleness,
By good ensample, this was his bisynesse.	By good example, this was his business.
But it were any persone obstinat,	Unless it were an obstinate person,
What so he were, of heigh or lough estat,	Whoever he was, of high or low rank,
Hym wolde he snybben sharply for the nonys.	He would rebuke him sharply at that time.
A bettre preest I trowe that nowher noon ys.	I believe that nowhere is there a better priest.
He waited after no pompe and reverence,	He expected no pomp and ceremony,
Ne maked him a spiced conscience,	Nor made himself an overly fastidious conscience,
But Cristes loore and his apostles twelve	But Christ's teaching and His twelve apostles
He taughte; but first he folwed it hymselve.	He taught; but first he followed it himself.
With hym ther was a PLOWMAN, was his brother,	With him there was a PLOWMAN, who was his brother,
That hadde ylad of dong ful many a fother;	Who had hauled very many a cartload of dung;
A trewe swynkere and a good was he,	He was a true and good worker,
Lyvynge in pees and parfit charitee.	Living in peace and perfect love.
God loved he best with al his hoole herte	He loved God best with all his whole heart
At alle tymes, thogh him gamed or smerte,	At all times, whether it pleased or pained him,
And thanne his neighebor right as hymselve.	And then (he loved) his neighbor exactly as himself.
He wolde thresshe, and therto dyke and delve,	He would thresh, and moreover make ditches and dig,
For Cristes sake, for every povre wight,	For Christ's sake, for every poor person,
Withouten hire, if it lay in his myght.	Without payment, if it lay in his power.
His tithes payde he ful faire and wel,	He paid his tithes completely and well,
Bothe of his propre swynk and his catel.	Both of his own labor and of his possessions.
In a tabard he rood upon a mere.	He rode in a tabard (sleeveless jacket) upon a mare.
Ther was also a REVE, and a MILLERE,	There was also a REEVE, and a MILLER,
A SOMNOUR, and a PARDONER also,	A SUMMONER, and a PARDONER also,
A MAUNCIPLE, and myself -- ther were namo.	A MANCIPLE, and myself -- there were no more.
The MILLERE was a stout carl for the nones;	The MILLER was a stout fellow indeed;
Ful byg he was of brawn, and eek of bones.	He was very strong of muscle, and also of bones.
That proved wel, for over al ther he cam,	That was well proven, for wherever he came,
At wrastlynge he wolde have alwey the ram.	At wrestling he would always take the the prize.
He was short-sholdred, brood, a thikke knarre;	He was stoutly built, broad, a large-framed fellow;
Ther was no dore that he nolde heve of harre,	There was no door that he would not heave off its hinges,
Or breke it at a rennyng with his heed.	Or break it by running at it with his head.
His berd as any sowe or fox was reed,	His beard was red as any sow or fox,
And therto brood, as though it were a spade.	And moreover broad, as though it were a spade.
Upon the cop right of his nose he hade	Upon the exact top of his nose he had
A werte, and theron stood a toft of herys,	A wart, and thereon stood a tuft of hairs,
Reed as the brustles of a sowes erys;	Red as the bristles of a sow's ears;
His nosethirles blake were and wyde.	His nostrils were black and wide.
A swerd and a bokeler bar he by his syde.	He wore a sword and a buckler by his side.
His mouth as greet was as a greet forneys.	His mouth was as large as a large furnace.
He was a janglere and a goliardeys,	He was a loudmouth and a buffoon,
And that was moost of synne and harlotries.	And that was mostly of sin and deeds of harlotry.
Wel koude he stelen corn and tollen thries;	He well knew how to steal corn and take payment three times;
And yet he hadde a thombe of gold, pardee.	And yet he had a thumb of gold, indeed.
A whit cote and a blew hood wered he.	He wore a white coat and a blue hood.
A baggepipe wel koude he blowe and sowne,	He well knew how to blow and play a bag-pipe,
And therwithal he broghte us out of towne.	And with that he brought us out of town.
A gentil MAUNCIPLE was ther of a temple,	There was a fine MANCIPLE of a temple (law school),
Of which achatours myghte take exemple	Of whom buyers of provisions might take example
For to be wise in byynge of vitaille;	For how to be wise in buying of victuals;
For wheither that he payde or took by taille,	For whether he paid (cash) or took (goods) on credit,
Algate he wayted so in his achaat	Always he watched so (carefully for his opportunity) in his purchases
That he was ay biforn and in good staat.	That he was always ahead and in good state.
Now is nat that of God a ful fair grace	Now is not that a very fair grace of God
That swich a lewed mannes wit shal pace	That such an unlearned man's wit shall surpass
The wisdom of an heep of lerned men?	The wisdom of a heap of learned men?
Of maistres hadde he mo than thries ten,	He had more than three times ten masters,
That weren of lawe expert and curious,	Who were expert and skillful in law,
Of which ther were a duszeyne in that hous	Of whom there were a dozen in that house
Worthy to been stywardes of rente and lond	Worthy to be stewards of rent and land
Of any lord that is in Engelond,	Of any lord that is in England,
To make hym lyve by his propre good	To make him live by his own wealth
In honour dettelees (but if he were wood),	In honor and debtless (unless he were crazy),
Or lyve as scarsly as hym list desire;	Or live as economically as it pleased him to desire;
And able for to helpen al a shire	And (they would be) able to help all a shire
In any caas that myghte falle or happe.	In any emergency that might occur or happen.
And yet this Manciple sette hir aller cappe.	And yet this Manciple fooled them all.
The REVE was a sclendre colerik man.	The REEVE was a slender choleric man.
His berd was shave as ny as ever he kan;	His beard was shaved as close as ever he can;
His heer was by his erys ful round yshorn;	His hair was closely cropped by his ears;
His top was dokked lyk a preest biforn.	The top of his head in front was cut short like a priest's.
Ful longe were his legges and ful lene,	His legs were very long and very lean,
Ylyk a staf; ther was no calf ysene.	Like a stick; there was no calf to be seen.
Wel koude he kepe a gerner and a bynne;	He well knew how to keep a granary and a storage bin;
Ther was noon auditour koude on him wynne.	There was no auditor who could earn anything (by catching him).
Wel wiste he by the droghte and by the reyn	He well knew by the drought and by the rain
The yeldynge of his seed and of his greyn.	(What would be) the yield of his seed and of his grain.
His lordes sheep, his neet, his dayerye,	His lord's sheep, his cattle, his herd of dairy cows,
His swyn, his hors, his stoor, and his pultrye	His swine, his horses, his livestock, and his poultry
Was hoolly in this Reves governynge,	Was wholly in this Reeve's control,
And by his covenant yaf the rekenynge,	And in accord with his contract he gave the reckoning,
Syn that his lord was twenty yeer of age.	Since his lord was twenty years of age.
Ther koude no man brynge hym in arrerage.	There was no man who could find him in arrears.
Ther nas baillif, ne hierde, nor oother hyne,	There was no farm manager, nor herdsman, nor other servant,
That he ne knew his sleighte and his covyne;	Whose trickery and treachery he did not know;
They were adrad of hym as of the deeth.	They were afraid of him as of the plague.
His wonyng was ful faire upon an heeth;	His dwelling was very nicely situated upon an heath;
With grene trees yshadwed was his place.	His place was shaded by green trees.
He koude bettre than his lord purchace.	He could buy property better than his lord could.
Ful riche he was astored pryvely.	He was secretly very richly provided.
His lord wel koude he plesen subtilly,	He well knew how to please his lord subtly,
To yeve and lene hym of his owene good,	By giving and lending him some of his lord's own possessions,
And have a thank, and yet a cote and hood.	And have thanks, and also a coat and hood (as a reward).
In youthe he hadde lerned a good myster:	In youth he had learned a good craft:
He was a wel good wrighte, a carpenter.	He was a very good craftsman, a carpenter.
This Reve sat upon a ful good stot	This Reeve sat upon a very good horse
That was al pomely grey and highte Scot.	That was all dapple gray and was called Scot.
A long surcote of pers upon he hade,	He had on a long outer coat of dark blue,
And by his syde he baar a rusty blade.	And by his side he wore a rusty sword.
Of Northfolk was this Reve of which I telle,	Of Northfolk was this Reeve of whom I tell,
Biside a toun men clepen Baldeswelle.	Near to a town men call Bawdeswelle.
Tukked he was as is a frere aboute,	He had his coat hitched up and belted, like a friar,
And evere he rood the hyndreste of oure route.	And ever he rode as the last of our company.
A SOMONOUR was ther with us in that place,	There was a SUMMONER with us in that place,
That hadde a fyr-reed cherubynnes face,	Who had a fire-red cherubim's face,
For saucefleem he was, with eyen narwe.	For it was pimpled and discolored, with swollen eyelids.
As hoot he was and lecherous as a sparwe,	He was as hot and lecherous as a sparrow,
With scalled browes blake and piled berd.	With black, scabby brows and a beard with hair fallen out.
Of his visage children were aferd.	Children were afraid of his face.
Ther nas quyk-silver, lytarge, ne brymstoon,	There was no mercury, lead monoxide, nor sulphur,
Boras, ceruce, ne oille of tartre noon,	Borax, white lead, nor any oil of tarter,
Ne oynement that wolde clense and byte,	Nor ointment that would cleanse and burn,
That hym myghte helpen of his whelkes white,	That could cure him of his white pustules,
Nor of the knobbes sittynge on his chekes.	Nor of the knobs sitting on his cheeks.
Wel loved he garleek, oynons, and eek lekes,	He well loved garlic, onions, and also leeks,
And for to drynken strong wyn, reed as blood;	And to drink strong wine, red as blood;
Thanne wolde he speke and crie as he were wood.	Then he would speak and cry out as if he were crazy.
And whan that he wel dronken hadde the wyn,	And when he had drunk deeply of the wine,
Thanne wolde he speke no word but Latyn.	Then he would speak no word but Latin.
A fewe termes hadde he, two or thre,	He had a few legal terms, two or three,
That he had lerned out of som decree --	That he had learned out of some text of ecclesiastical law --
No wonder is, he herde it al the day;	That is no wonder, he heard it all the day;
And eek ye knowen wel how that a jay	And also you know well how a jay
Kan clepen "Watte" as wel as kan the pope.	Can call out "Walter" as well as the pope can.
But whoso koude in oother thyng hym grope,	But whoever knew how to examine him in other matters,
Thanne hadde he spent al his philosophie;	(Would find that) he had used up all his learning;
Ay "Questio quid iuris" wolde he crie.	Always "The question is, what point of the law applies?" he would cry.
He was a gentil harlot and a kynde;	He was a fine rascal and a kind one;
A bettre felawe sholde men noght fynde.	One could not find a better fellow.
He wolde suffre for a quart of wyn	For a quart of wine he would allow
A good felawe to have his concubyn	A good fellow to have his concubine
A twelf month, and excuse hym atte fulle;	For twelve months, and excuse him completely;
Ful prively a fynch eek koude he pulle.	Secretly he also knew how to pull off a clever trick.
And if he foond owher a good felawe,	And if he found anywhere a good fellow,
He wolde techen him to have noon awe	He would teach him to have no awe
In swich caas of the ercedekenes curs,	Of the archdeacon's curse (of excommunication) in such a case,
But if a mannes soule were in his purs;	Unless a man's soul were in his purse;
For in his purs he sholde ypunysshed be.	For in his purse he would be punished.
"Purs is the ercedekenes helle," seyde he.	"Purse is the archdeacon's hell," he said.
But wel I woot he lyed right in dede;	But well I know he lied right certainly;
Of cursyng oghte ech gilty man him drede,	Each guilty man ought to be afraid of excommunication,
For curs wol slee right as assoillyng savith,	For excommunication will slay just as forgiveness saves,
And also war hym of a Significavit.	And let him also beware of a Significavit (order for imprisonment).
In daunger hadde he at his owene gise	In his control he had as he pleased
The yonge girles of the diocise,	The young people of the diocese,
And knew hir conseil, and was al hir reed.	And knew their secrets, and was the adviser of them all.
A gerland hadde he set upon his heed,	He had set a garland upon his heed,
As greet as it were for an ale-stake.	As large as if it were for the sign of a tavern
A bokeleer hadde he maad hym of a cake.	He had made himself a shield of a cake.
With hym ther rood a gentil PARDONER	With him there rode a fine PARDONER
Of Rouncivale, his freend and his compeer,	Of Rouncivale, his friend and his companion,
That streight was comen fro the court of Rome.	Who had come straight from the court of Rome.
Ful loude he soong "Com hider, love, to me!"	Very loud he sang "Come hither, love, to me!"
This Somonour bar to hym a stif burdoun;	This Summoner harmonized with him in a strong bass;
Was nevere trompe of half so greet a soun.	There was never a trumpet of half so great a sound.
This Pardoner hadde heer as yelow as wex,	This Pardoner had hair as yellow as wax,
But smothe it heeng as dooth a strike of flex;	But smooth it hung as does a clump of flax;
By ounces henge his lokkes that he hadde,	By small strands hung such locks as he had,
And therwith he his shuldres overspradde;	And he spread them over his shoulders;
But thynne it lay, by colpons oon and oon.	But thin it lay, by strands one by one.
But hood, for jolitee, wered he noon,	But to make an attractive appearance, he wore no hood,
For it was trussed up in his walet.	For it was trussed up in his knapsack.
Hym thoughte he rood al of the newe jet;	It seemed to him that he rode in the very latest style;
Dischevelee, save his cappe, he rood al bare.	With hair unbound, save for his cap, he rode all bare-headed.
Swiche glarynge eyen hadde he as an hare.	He had glaring eyes such as has a hare.
A vernycle hadde he sowed upon his cappe.	He had sewn a Veronica upon his cap.
His walet, biforn hym in his lappe,	Before him in his lap, (he had) his knapsack,
Bretful of pardoun comen from Rome al hoot.	Brimful of pardons come all fresh from Rome.
A voys he hadde as smal as hath a goot.	He had a voice as small as a goat has.
No berd hadde he, ne nevere sholde have;	He had no beard, nor never would have;
As smothe it was as it were late shave.	It (his face) was as smooth as if it were recently shaven.
I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare.	I believe he was a eunuch or a homosexual.
But of his craft, fro Berwyk into Ware	But as to his craft, from Berwick to Ware
Ne was ther swich another pardoner.	There was no other pardoner like him.
For in his male he hadde a pilwe-beer,	For in his pouch he had a pillow-case,
Which that he seyde was Oure Lady veyl;	Which he said was Our Lady's veil;
He seyde he hadde a gobet of the seyl	He said he had a piece of the sail
That Seint Peter hadde, whan that he wente	That Saint Peter had, when he went
Upon the see, til Jhesu Crist hym hente.	Upon the sea, until Jesus Christ took him.
He hadde a croys of latoun ful of stones,	He had a cross of latten (brass-like alloy) covered with stones,
And in a glas he hadde pigges bones.	And in a glass container he had pigs' bones.
But with thise relikes, whan that he fond	But with these relics, when he found
A povre person dwellynge upon lond,	A poor parson dwelling in the countryside,
Upon a day he gat hym moore moneye	In one day he got himself more money
Than that the person gat in monthes tweye;	Than the parson got in two months;
And thus, with feyned flaterye and japes,	And thus, with feigned flattery and tricks,
He made the person and the peple his apes.	He made fools of the parson and the people.
But trewely to tellen atte laste,	But truly to tell at the last,
He was in chirche a noble ecclesiaste.	He was in church a noble ecclesiast.
Wel koude he rede a lessoun or a storie,	He well knew how to read a lesson or a story,
But alderbest he song an offertorie;	But best of all he sang an Offertory;
For wel he wiste, whan that song was songe,	For he knew well, when that song was sung,
He moste preche and wel affile his tonge	He must preach and well smooth his speech
To wynne silver, as he ful wel koude;	To win silver, as he very well knew how;
Therefore he song the murierly and loude.	Therefore he sang the more merrily and loud.
Now have I toold you soothly, in a clause,	Now have I told you truly, briefly,
Th' estaat, th' array, the nombre, and eek the cause	The rank, the dress, the number, and also the cause
Why that assembled was this compaignye	Why this company was assembled
In Southwerk at this gentil hostelrye	In Southwark at this fine hostelry
That highte the Tabard, faste by the Belle.	That is called the Tabard, close by the Bell.
But now is tyme to yow for to telle	But now it is time to tell to you
How that we baren us that ilke nyght,	How we conducted ourselves that same night,
Whan we were in that hostelrie alyght;	When we had arrived in that hostelry;
And after wol I telle of our viage	And after that I will tell of our journey
And al the remenaunt of oure pilgrimage.	And all the rest of our pilgrimage.
But first I pray yow, of youre curteisye,	But first I pray yow, of your courtesy,
That ye n' arette it nat my vileynye,	That you do not attribute it to my rudeness,
Thogh that I pleynly speke in this mateere,	Though I speak plainly in this matter,
To telle yow hir wordes and hir cheere,	To tell you their words and their behavior,
Ne thogh I speke hir wordes proprely.	Nor though I speak their words accurately.
For this ye knowen al so wel as I:	For this you know as well as I:
Whoso shal telle a tale after a man,	Whoever must repeat a story after someone,
He moot reherce as ny as evere he kan	He must repeat as closely as ever he knows how
Everich a word, if it be in his charge,	Every single word, if it be in his power,
Al speke he never so rudeliche and large,	Although he may speak ever so rudely and freely,
Or ellis he moot telle his tale untrewe,	Or else he must tell his tale inaccurately,
Or feyne thyng, or fynde wordes newe.	Or make up things, or find new words.
He may nat spare, althogh he were his brother;	He may not refrain from (telling the truth), although he were his brother;
He moot as wel seye o word as another.	He must as well say one word as another.
Crist spak hymself ful brode in hooly writ,	Christ himself spoke very plainly in holy writ,
And wel ye woot no vileynye is it.	And you know well it is no rudeness.
Eek Plato seith, whoso kan hym rede,	Also Plato says, whosoever knows how to read him,
The wordes moote be cosyn to the dede.	The words must be closely related to the deed.
Also I prey yow to foryeve it me,	Also I pray you to forgive it to me,
Al have I nat set folk in hir degree	Although I have not set folk in order of their rank
Heere in this tale, as that they sholde stonde.	Here in this tale, as they should stand.
My wit is short, ye may wel understonde.	My wit is short, you can well understand.
Greet chiere made oure Hoost us everichon,	Our Host made great hospitality to everyone of us,
And to the soper sette he us anon.	And to the supper he set us straightway.
He served us with vitaille at the beste;	He served us with victuals of the best sort;
Strong was the wyn, and wel to drynke us leste.	The wine was strong, and it well pleased us to drink.
A semely man OURE HOOSTE was withalle	OUR HOST was an impressive man indeed
For to been a marchal in an halle.	(Qualified) to be a master of ceremonies in a hall.
A large man he was with eyen stepe --	He was a large man with prominent eyes --
A fairer burgeys was ther noon in Chepe --	There was no better business man in Cheapside --
Boold of his speche, and wys, and wel ytaught,	Bold of his speech, and wise, and well mannered,
And of manhod hym lakkede right naught.	And he lacked nothing at all of the qualities proper to a man.
Eek therto he was right a myrie man;	Also moreover he was a right merry man;
And after soper pleyen he bigan,	And after supper he began to be merry,
And spak of myrthe amonges othere thynges,	And spoke of mirth among other things,
Whan that we hadde maad oure rekenynges,	When we had paid our bills,
And seyde thus: "Now, lordynges, trewely,	And said thus: "Now, gentlemen, truly,
Ye been to me right welcome, hertely;	You are right heartily welcome to me;
For by my trouthe, if that I shal nat lye,	For by my word, if I shall not lie (I must say),
I saugh nat this yeer so myrie a compaignye	I saw not this year so merry a company
Atones in this herberwe as is now.	At one time in this lodging as is (here) now.
Fayn wolde I doon yow myrthe, wiste I how.	I would gladly make you happy, if I knew how.
And of a myrthe I am right now bythoght,	And I have just now thought of an amusement,
To doon yow ese, and it shal coste noght.	To give you pleasure, and it shall cost nothing.
"Ye goon to Caunterbury -- God yow speede,	"You go to Canterbury -- God give you success,
The blisful martir quite yow youre meede!	May the blessed martyr give you your reward!
And wel I woot, as ye goon by the weye,	And well I know, as you go by the way,
Ye shapen yow to talen and to pleye;	You intend to tell tales and to amuse yourselves;
For trewely, confort ne myrthe is noon	For truly, it is no comfort nor mirth
To ride by the weye doumb as a stoon;	To ride by the way dumb as a stone;
And therfore wol I maken yow disport,	And therefore I will make a game for you,
As I seyde erst, and doon yow som confort.	As I said before, and provide you some pleasure.
And if yow liketh alle by oon assent	And if pleases you all unanimously
For to stonden at my juggement,	To be subject to my judgment,
And for to werken as I shal yow seye,	And to do as I shall tell you,
Tomorwe, whan ye riden by the weye,	Tomorrow, when you ride by the way,
Now, by my fader soule that is deed,	Now, by the soul of my father who is dead,
But ye be myrie, I wol yeve yow myn heed!	Unless you be merry, I will give you my head!
Hoold up youre hondes, withouten moore speche."	Hold up your hands, without more speech."
Oure conseil was nat longe for to seche.	Our decision was not long to seek out.
Us thoughte it was noght worth to make it wys,	It seemed to us it was not worthwhile to deliberate on it,
And graunted hym withouten moore avys,	And (we) granted his request without more discussion,
And bad him seye his voirdit as hym leste.	And asked him to say his decision as it pleased him.
"Lordynges," quod he, "now herkneth for the beste;	"Gentlemen," said he, "now listen for the best course of action;
But taak it nought, I prey yow, in desdeyn.	But, I pray yow, do not take it in disdain (scorn it).
This is the poynt, to speken short and pleyn,	This is the point, to speak briefly and clearly,
That ech of yow, to shorte with oure weye,	That each of yow, to make our way seem short by this means,
In this viage shal telle tales tweye	Must tell two tales in this journey
To Caunterbury-ward, I mene it so,	On the way to Canterbury, that is what I mean,
And homward he shal tellen othere two,	And on the homeward trip he shall tell two others,
Of aventures that whilom han bifalle.	About adventures that in old times have happened.
And which of yow that bereth hym best of alle --	And whoever of you who does best of all --
That is to seyn, that telleth in this caas	That is to say, who tells in this case
Tales of best sentence and moost solaas --	Tales of best moral meaning and most pleasure --
Shal have a soper at oure aller cost	Shall have a supper at the cost of us all
Heere in this place, sittynge by this post,	Here in this place, sitting by this post,
Whan that we come agayn fro Caunterbury.	When we come back from Canterbury.
And for to make yow the moore mury,	And to make you the more merry,
I wol myselven goodly with yow ryde,	I will myself gladly ride with you,
Right at myn owene cost, and be youre gyde;	Entirely at my own cost, and be your guide;
And whoso wole my juggement withseye	And whosoever will not accept my judgment
Shal paye al that we spenden by the weye.	Shall pay all that we spend by the way.
And if ye vouche sauf that it be so,	And if you grant that it be so,
Tel me anon, withouten wordes mo,	Tell me straightway, without more words,
And I wol erly shape me therfore."	And I will get ready early for this."
This thyng was graunted, and oure othes swore	This thing was granted, and our oaths sworn
With ful glad herte, and preyden hym also	With very glad hearts, and (we) prayed him also
That he wolde vouche sauf for to do so,	That he would consent to do so,
And that he wolde been oure governour,	And that he would be our governor,
And of oure tales juge and reportour,	And judge and score keeper of our tales,
And sette a soper at a certeyn pris,	And set a supper at a certain price,
And we wol reuled been at his devys	And we will be ruled as he wishes
In heigh and lough; and thus by oon assent	In every respect; and thus unanimously
We been acorded to his juggement.	We are accorded to his judgment.
And therupon the wyn was fet anon;	And thereupon the wine was fetched immediately;
We dronken, and to reste wente echon,	We drank, and each one went to rest,
Withouten any lenger taryynge.	Without any longer tarrying.
Amorwe, whan that day bigan to sprynge,	In the morning, when day began to spring,
Up roos oure Hoost, and was oure aller cok,	Our Host arose, and was the rooster of us all (awakened us).
And gadrede us togidre alle in a flok,	And gathered us together all in a flock,
And forth we riden a litel moore than paas	And forth we rode at little more than a walk
Unto the Wateryng of Seint Thomas;	Unto the Watering of Saint Thomas;
And there oure Hoost bigan his hors areste	And there our Host stopped his horse
And seyde, "Lordynges, herkneth, if yow leste.	And said, "Gentlemen, listen, if you please.
Ye woot youre foreward, and I it yow recorde.	You know your agreement, and I remind you of it.
If even-song and morwe-song accorde,	If what you said last night agrees with what you say this morning,
Lat se now who shal telle the firste tale.	Let's see now who shall tell the first tale.
As evere mote I drynke wyn or ale,	As ever I may drink wine or ale,
Whoso be rebel to my juggement	Whosoever may be rebel to my judgment
Shal paye for al that by the wey is spent.	Shall pay for all that is spent by the way.
Now draweth cut, er that we ferrer twynne;	Now draw straws, before we depart further (from London);
He which that hath the shorteste shal bigynne.	He who has the shortest shall begin.
Sire Knyght," quod he, "my mayster and my lord,	Sir Knight," said he, "my master and my lord,
Now draweth cut, for that is myn accord.	Now draw a straw, for that is my decision.
Cometh neer," quod he, "my lady Prioresse.	Come nearer," he said, "my lady Prioress.
And ye, sire Clerk, lat be youre shamefastnesse,	And you, sir Clerk, let be your modesty,
Ne studieth noght; ley hond to, every man!"	And study not; lay hand to (draw a straw), every man!"
Anon to drawen every wight bigan,	Every person began straightway to draw,
And shortly for to tellen as it was,	And shortly to tell as it was,
Were it by aventure, or sort, or cas,	Were it by chance, or destiny, or luck,
The sothe is this: the cut fil to the Knyght,	The truth is this: the draw fell to the Knight,
Of which ful blithe and glad was every wyght,	For which everyone was very happy and glad,
And telle he moste his tale, as was resoun,	And he must tell his tale, as was reasonable,
By foreward and by composicioun,	By our previous promise and by formal agreement,
As ye han herd; what nedeth wordes mo?	As you have heard; what more words are needed?
And whan this goode man saugh that it was so,	And when this good man saw that it was so,
As he that wys was and obedient	Like one who was wise and obedient
To kepe his foreward by his free assent,	To keep his agreement by his free assent,
He seyde, "Syn I shal bigynne the game,	He said, "Since I must begin the game,
What, welcome be the cut, a Goddes name!	What! Welcome be the draw, in God's name!
Now lat us ryde, and herkneth what I seye."	Now let us ride, and listen to what I say."
And with that word we ryden forth oure weye,	And with that word we rode forth on our way,
And he bigan with right a myrie cheere	And he began with a truly merry demeanor
His tale anon, and seyde as ye may heere.	To tell his tale straightway, and said as you may hear.
The Prologe of the Reves Tale.	The Prologue of Reeve's Tale.
Whan folk hadde laughen at this nyce cas	When folk had laughed at this foolish business
Of Absolon and hende Nicholas,	Of Absolon and clever Nicholas,
Diverse folk diversely they seyde,	Different folk said different opinions,
But for the moore part they loughe and pleyde.	But for the most part they laughed and enjoyed themselves.
Ne at this tale I saugh no man hym greve,	And at this tale I saw no man aggrieved,
But it were oonly Osewold the Reve.	Except for only Osewold the Reeve.
By cause he was of carpenteris craft,	Because he was of the carpenter's craft,
A litel ire is in his herte ylaft;	A little anger is left in his heart;
He gan to grucche, and blamed it a lite.	He began to grouch, and criticized it a little.
"So theek," quod he, "ful wel koude I thee quite	"As I may prosper," said he, "very well could I repay thee
With bleryng of a proud milleres ye,	With (a tale of the) blearing of a proud miller's eye (tricking him),
If that me liste speke of ribaudye.	If I wanted to speak of ribaldry.
But ik am oold; me list not pley for age;	But I am old; because of age I do not want to play;
Gras tyme is doon; my fodder is now forage;	Grass time is done; my fodder is now dry straw;
This white top writeth myne olde yeris;	This white head reveals my old years;
Myn herte is also mowled as myne heris,	My heart is as moldy as my hairs,
But if I fare as dooth an open-ers --	Unless I fare as does the fruit of the medlar --
That ilke fruyt is ever lenger the wers,	That same fruit continually grows worse,
Til it be roten in mullok or in stree.	Until it is rotten in rubbish or in straw.
We olde men, I drede, so fare we:	We old men, I fear, fare like that:
Til we be roten, kan we nat be rype;	Until we are rotten, we can not be ripe;
We hoppen alwey whil that the world wol pype.	We dance always while the world will pipe.
For in oure wyl ther stiketh evere a nayl,	For in our will there sticks ever a nail,
To have an hoor heed and a grene tayl,	To have a white head and a green tail,
As hath a leek; for thogh oure myght be goon,	As a leek has; for though our power is gone,
Oure wyl desireth folie evere in oon.	Our will desires folly continually.
For whan we may nat doon, than wol we speke;	For when we can not do anything, then will we talk about it;
Yet in oure asshen olde is fyr yreke.	Yet in our old ashes fire is raked over (covered).
"Foure gleedes han we, which I shal devyse --	"Four live coals have we, which I shall describe --
Avauntyng, liyng, anger, coveitise;	Boasting, lying, anger, greed;
Thise foure sparkles longen unto eelde.	These four little sparks belong to old age.
Oure olde lemes mowe wel been unweelde,	Our old limbs may well be feeble,
But wyl ne shal nat faillen, that is sooth.	But desire shall not be lacking, that is truth.
And yet ik have alwey a coltes tooth,	And yet I have always a young man's desires,
As many a yeer as it is passed henne	As many years as have passed hence
Syn that my tappe of lif bigan to renne.	Since my tap of life began to run.
For sikerly, whan I was bore, anon	For surely, when I was born, immediately
Deeth drough the tappe of lyf and leet it gon,	Death turned on the spigot of life and let it flow,
And ever sithe hath so the tappe yronne	And ever since the tap has so run
Til that almoost al empty is the tonne.	Until the barrel is almost all empty.
The streem of lyf now droppeth on the chymbe.	The stream of life now drops on the rim.
The sely tonge may wel rynge and chymbe	The foolish tongue may well ring and chime
Of wrecchednesse that passed is ful yoore;	About wretchedness that passed long ago;
With olde folk, save dotage, is namoore!"	With old folk, save dotage, there is no more!"
Whan that oure Hoost hadde herd this sermonyng,	When our Host had heard this sermon making,
He gan to speke as lordly as a kyng.	He began to speak as lordly as a king.
He seide, "What amounteth al this wit?	He said, "What amounts all this wit?
What shul we speke alday of hooly writ?	What! shall we speak all day of holy writ?
The devel made a reve for to preche,	The devil made a reeve to preach,
Or of a soutere a shipman or a leche.	Or of a cobbler made a shipman or a physician.
Sey forth thy tale, and tarie nat the tyme.	Say forth thy tale, and do not waste the time.
Lo Depeford, and it is half-wey pryme!	Lo Deptford, and it is almost seven thirty!
Lo Grenewych, ther many a shrewe is inne!	Lo Greenwich, in which is many a rascal!
It were al tyme thy tale to bigynne."	It is well time to begin thy tale."
"Now, sires," quod this Osewold the Reve,	"Now, sires," said this Osewold the Reeve,
"I pray yow alle that ye nat yow greve,	"I pray yow all that you not be displeased,
Thogh I answere, and somdeel sette his howve;	Though I answer (him), and somewhat make a fool of him;
For leveful is with force force of-showve.	For it is permissable to repel force with force.
"This dronke Millere hath ytoold us heer	"This drunk Miller has told us here
How that bigyled was a carpenteer,	How a carpenter was tricked,
Peraventure in scorn, for I am oon.	Perhaps in scorn, for I am one.
And, by youre leve, I shal hym quite anoon;	And, by your leave, I shall repay him right now;
Right in his cherles termes wol I speke.	Right in his churl's terms will I speak.
I pray to God his nekke mote to-breke;	I pray to God his neck may break into pieces;
He kan wel in myn eye seen a stalke,	He can well in my eye see a piece of straw,
But in his owene he kan nat seen a balke."	But in his own he can not see a large piece of timber."
Heere bigynneth the Reves Tale.	Here begins the Reeves Tale.
At Trumpyngtoun, nat fer fro Cantebrigge,	At Trumpington, not far from Cambridge,
Ther gooth a brook, and over that a brigge,	There goes a brook, and over that a bridge,
Upon the whiche brook ther stant a melle;	Upon the which brook there stands a mill;
And this is verray sooth that I yow telle:	And this is absolute truth that I tell you:
A millere was ther dwellynge many a day.	A miller was there dwelling many a day.
As any pecok he was proud and gay.	As any peacock he was proud and gay.
Pipen he koude and fisshe, and nettes beete,	He could play the bagpipe and fish, and mend nets,
And turne coppes, and wel wrastle and sheete;	And play a drinking game, and well wrestle and shoot;
Ay by his belt he baar a long panade,	Always by his belt he carried a long cutlass,
And of a swerd ful trenchant was the blade.	And very sharp was the blade of the sword.
A joly poppere baar he in his pouche;	An elegant dagger he carried in his pouch;
Ther was no man, for peril, dorste hym touche.	There was no man, for peril, dared touch him.
A Sheffeld thwitel baar he in his hose.	A Sheffield knife he carried in his hose.
Round was his face, and camus was his nose;	Round was his face, and he had a pug nose;
As piled as an ape was his skulle.	As bald as an ape was his skull.
He was a market-betere atte fulle.	He was a quarrelsome bully in every way.
Ther dorste no wight hand upon hym legge,	There dared no person lay hand upon him,
That he ne swoor he sholde anon abegge.	That he did not swear he should pay for it right away.
A theef he was for sothe of corn and mele,	A thief he was, in truth, of grain and meal,
And that a sly, and usaunt for to stele.	And that a sly one, and accustomed to steal.
His name was hoote deynous Symkyn.	His name was called haughty Symkyn.
A wyf he hadde, ycomen of noble kyn;	A wife he had, come of noble kin;
The person of the toun hir fader was.	The parson of the town was her father.
With hire he yaf ful many a panne of bras,	With her he gave very many a pan of brass,
For that Symkyn sholde in his blood allye.	So that Symkyn should be allied with his family.
She was yfostred in a nonnerye;	She was fostered in a nunnery;
For Symkyn wolde no wyf, as he sayde,	For Symkyn would have no wife, as he said,
But she were wel ynorissed and a mayde,	Unless she were well educated and a virgin,
To saven his estaat of yomanrye.	To preserve his state of yeomanry.
And she was proud, and peert as is a pye.	And she was proud, and brazen as is a magpie.
A ful fair sighte was it upon hem two;	A very fair sight was it to look upon those two;
On halydayes biforn hire wolde he go	On holidays before her would he go
With his typet wounde aboute his heed,	With the tip of his hood wound about his head,
And she cam after in a gyte of reed;	And she came after in a gown of red;
And Symkyn hadde hosen of the same.	And Symkyn had hose of the same color.
Ther dorste no wight clepen hire but "dame";	There dared no one call her anything but "lady";
Was noon so hardy that wente by the weye	There was no one so brave that went by the way
That with hire dorste rage or ones pleye,	That dared flirt with her or once play,
But if he wolde be slayn of Symkyn	Unless he wished to be slain by Symkyn
With panade, or with knyf, or boidekyn.	With cutlass, or with knife, or dagger.
For jalous folk ben perilous everemo --	For jealous folk are dangerous always --
Algate they wolde hire wyves wenden so.	At least they would like their wives to think so.
And eek, for she was somdel smoterlich,	And also, because she was a bit besmirched (by her illegitimacy),
She was as digne as water in a dich,	She was as haughty as water in a ditch,
And ful of hoker and of bisemare.	And full of disdain and of scorn.
Hir thoughte that a lady sholde hire spare,	She thought that a lady should be aloof,
What for hire kynrede and hir nortelrie	Considering her family and her education
That she hadde lerned in the nonnerie.	Which she had learned in the nunnery.
A doghter hadde they bitwixe hem two	A daughter had they between them two
Of twenty yeer, withouten any mo,	Of twenty years of age, without any more,
Savynge a child that was of half yeer age;	Except for a child that was a half year of age;
In cradel it lay and was a propre page.	In cradle it lay and was a good looking little boy.
This wenche thikke and wel ygrowen was,	This wench was thick and well grown,
With kamus nose and eyen greye as glas,	With pug nose and eyes gray as glass,
With buttokes brode and brestes rounde and hye.	With buttocks broad and breasts round and high.
But right fair was hire heer; I wol nat lye.	But right fair was her hair; I will not lie.
This person of the toun, for she was feir,	This parson of the town, because she was fair,
In purpos was to maken hire his heir,	Was determined to make her his heir,
Bothe of his catel and his mesuage,	Both of his property and his household,
And straunge he made it of hir mariage.	And he raised difficulties about her marriage.
His purpos was for to bistowe hire hye	His purpose was to bestow her high
Into som worthy blood of auncetrye;	Into some worthy family of noble ancestry;
For hooly chirches good moot been despended	For holy church's goods must be dispensed
On hooly chirches blood, that is descended.	To holy church's blood, which is descended from the church.
Therfore he wolde his hooly blood honoure,	Therefore he would his holy blood honor,
Though that he hooly chirche sholde devoure.	Though he holy church should devour.
Greet sokene hath this millere, out of doute,	A profitable monopoly on milling has this miller, out of doubt,
With whete and malt of al the land aboute;	With wheat and malt of all the land about;
And nameliche ther was a greet collegge	And namely there was an important college
Men clepen the Soler Halle at Cantebregge;	People call the Soler Hall at Cambridge;
Ther was hir whete and eek hir malt ygrounde.	There their wheat and also their malt was ground.
And on a day it happed, in a stounde,	And on one day it happened, at a time,
Sik lay the maunciple on a maladye;	The manciple lay sick with a malady;
Men wenden wisly that he sholde dye.	People thought indeed that he should die.
For which this millere stal bothe mele and corn	For which this miller stole both meal and grain
An hundred tyme moore than biforn;	A hundred times more than before;
For therbiforn he stal but curteisly,	For before this he stole but courteously,
But now he was a theef outrageously,	But now he was a thief excessively,
For which the wardeyn chidde and made fare.	For which the warden (of the college) complained and made a fuss.
But therof sette the millere nat a tare;	But the miller thought that not worth a weed;
He craketh boost, and swoor it was nat so.	He blustered fiercely, and swore it was not so.
Thanne were ther yonge povre scolers two,	Then were there two young poor scholars,
That dwelten in this halle, of which I seye.	Who dwelt in this hall, of which I tell.
Testif they were, and lusty for to pleye,	Headstrong they were, and eager for sport,
And, oonly for hire myrthe and revelrye,	And, only for their mirth and amusement,
Upon the wardeyn bisily they crye	Upon the warden busily they implore
To yeve hem leve, but a litel stounde,	To give them leave, for but a little while,
To goon to mille and seen hir corn ygrounde;	To go to the mill and see their grain ground;
And hardily they dorste leye hir nekke	And boldly they dared pledge their necks
The millere sholde not stele hem half a pekke	The miller should not steal from them half a peck
Of corn by sleighte, ne by force hem reve;	Of grain by trickery, nor rob them by force;
And at the laste the wardeyn yaf hem leve.	And at the last the warden gave hem leave.
John highte that oon, and Aleyn highte that oother;	John was called that one, and Aleyn was called that other;
Of o toun were they born, that highte Strother,	Of one town were they born, that was called Strother,
Fer in the north; I kan nat telle where.	Far in the north; I can not tell where.
This Aleyn maketh redy al his gere,	This Aleyn makes ready all his gear,
And on an hors the sak he caste anon.	And on a horse the sack he cast immediately.
Forth goth Aleyn the clerk, and also John,	Forth goes Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
With good swerd and with bokeler by hir syde.	With good sword and with buckler by their sides.
John knew the wey -- hem nedede no gyde --	John knew the way -- they needed no guide --
And at the mille the sak adoun he layth.	And at the mill he lays the sack down.
Aleyn spak first: "Al hayl, Symond, y-fayth!	Aleyn spoke first: "All hail, Symond, in faith!
Hou fares thy faire doghter and thy wyf?"	How fares thy faire daughter and thy wife?"
"Aleyn, welcome," quod Symkyn, "by my lyf!	"Aleyn, welcome," said Symkyn, "by my life!
And John also, how now, what do ye heer?"	And John also, how now, what do you here?"
"Symond," quod John, "by God, nede has na peer.	"Symond," said John, "by God, need knows no law.
Hym boes serve hymself that has na swayn,	He who has no servant must serve himself,
Or elles he is a fool, as clerkes sayn.	Or else he is a fool, as clerks say.
Oure manciple, I hope he wil be deed,	Our manciple, I expect he will be dead,
Swa werkes ay the wanges in his heed;	So continually ache the teeth in his head;
And forthy is I come, and eek Alayn,	And therefore I am come, and also Alayn,
To grynde oure corn and carie it ham agayn;	To grind our grain and carry it home again;
I pray yow spede us heythen that ye may."	I pray you speed us hence as fast as you can."
"It shal be doon," quod Symkyn, "by my fay!	"It shall be done," said Symkyn, "by my faith!
What wol ye doon whil that it is in hande?"	What will you do while it is being done?"
"By God, right by the hopur wil I stande,"	"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"
Quod John, "and se howgates the corn gas in.	Said John, "and see how the grain goes in.
Yet saugh I nevere, by my fader kyn,	Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,
How that the hopur wagges til and fra."	How the hopper wags to and fro."
Aleyn answerde, "John, and wiltow swa?	Aleyn answered, "John, and wilt thou do so?
Thanne wil I be bynethe, by my croun,	Then will I be beneath, by my head,
And se how that the mele falles doun	And see how the meal falls down
Into the trough; that sal be my disport.	Into the trough; that shall be my sport.
For John, y-faith, I may been of youre sort;	For John, in faith, I may be like you;
I is as ille a millere as ar ye."	I am as poor a miller as you are."
This millere smyled of hir nycetee,	This miller smiled at their foolishness,
And thoghte, "Al this nys doon but for a wyle.	And thought, "All this is done only for a trick.
They wene that no man may hem bigyle,	They think that no man can trick them,
But by my thrift, yet shal I blere hir ye,	But by my welfare, yet shall I blear their eyes (fool them),
For al the sleighte in hir philosophye.	Despite all the trickery in their philosophy.
The moore queynte crekes that they make,	The more ingenious tricks that they make,
The moore wol I stele whan I take.	The more will I steal when I take.
In stide of flour yet wol I yeve hem bren.	Instead of flour yet will I give them bran.
`The gretteste clerkes been noght wisest men,'	`The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,'
As whilom to the wolf thus spak the mare.	As once to the wolf thus spoke the mare.
Of al hir art counte I noght a tare."	All their learning I reckon not worth a weed."
Out at the dore he gooth ful pryvely,	Out at the door he goes full stealthily,
Whan that he saugh his tyme, softely.	When he saw his time, quietly.
He looketh up and doun til he hath founde	He looks up and down until he has found
The clerkes hors, ther as it stood ybounde	The clerks' horse, where it stood tied
Bihynde the mille, under a levesel;	Behind the mill, under an arbor;
And to the hors he goth hym faire and wel;	And to the horse he goes gently;
He strepeth of the brydel right anon.	He strips off the bridle right away.
And whan the hors was laus, he gynneth gon	And when the horse was loose, he begins to go
Toward the fen, ther wilde mares renne,	Toward the fen, where wild mares run,
And forth with "wehee," thurgh thikke and thurgh thenne.	And forth with "wehee," through thick and through thin.
This millere gooth agayn, no word he seyde,	This miller goes back to the mill, no word he said,
But dooth his note, and with the clerkes pleyde	But does his work, and with the clerks amused himself
Til that hir corn was faire and weel ygrounde.	Until their grain was completely ground.
And whan the mele is sakked and ybounde,	And when the meal is sacked and tied,
This John goth out and fynt his hors away,	This John goes out and finds his horse gone away,
And gan to crie "Harrow!" and "Weylaway!	And began to cry "Help!" and "Wellaway!
Oure hors is lorn, Alayn, for Goddes banes,	Our horse is lost, Alayn, for God's bones,
Step on thy feet! Com of, man, al atanes!	Step on thy feet! Come on, man, quickly!
Allas, our wardeyn has his palfrey lorn."	Alas, our warden has lost his saddle horse."
This Aleyn al forgat, bothe mele and corn;	This Aleyn forgot everything, both meal and grain;
Al was out of his mynde his housbondrie.	All his skillful management was out of his mind.
"What, whilk way is he geen?" he gan to crie.	"What, which way is he gone?" he began to cry.
The wyf cam lepynge inward with a ren.	The wife cam leaping inward at a run.
She seyde, "Allas! youre hors goth to the fen	She said, "Alas! your horse goes to the fen
With wilde mares, as faste as he may go.	With wild mares, as fast as he can go.
Unthank come on his hand that boond hym so,	Curses come on his hand that tied him so carelessly,
And he that bettre sholde han knyt the reyne!"	And he that should have tied the rein better!"
"Allas," quod John, "Aleyn, for Cristes peyne	"Alas," said John, "Aleyn, for Christ's pain
Lay doun thy swerd, and I wil myn alswa.	Lay down thy sword, and I will mine also.
I is ful wight, God waat, as is a raa;	I am full strong (swift), God knows, as is a roe deer;
By Goddes herte, he sal nat scape us bathe!	By God's heart, he shall not escape us both!
Why ne had thow pit the capul in the lathe?	Why did thou not put the horse in the barn?
Ilhayl! By God, Alayn, thou is a fonne!"	Bad luck! By God, Alayn, thou art a fool!"
Thise sely clerkes han ful faste yronne	These hapless clerks have run very fast
Toward the fen, bothe Aleyn and eek John.	Toward the fen, both Aleyn and also John.
And whan the millere saugh that they were gon,	And when the miller saw that they were gone,
He half a busshel of hir flour hath take,	He half a bushel of their flour has taken,
And bad his wyf go knede it in a cake.	And ordered his wife to go knead it in a cake.
He seyde, "I trowe the clerkes were aferd.	He said, "I suppose the clerks were leery (of what I might do).
Yet kan a millere make a clerkes berd,	Yet can a miller make a clerk's beard (trick a clerk),
For al his art; now lat hem goon hir weye!	Despite all his learning; now let them go their way!
Lo, wher he gooth! Ye, lat the children pleye.	Lo, there he goes! Yes, let the children play.
They gete hym nat so lightly, by my croun."	They will not catch him easily, by my crown."
Thise sely clerkes rennen up and doun	These hapless clerks run up and down
With "Keep! Keep! Stand! Stand! Jossa, warderere,	With "Stop! Stop! Stand! Stand! Down there, watch out behind,
Ga whistle thou, and I shal kepe hym heere!"	Go whistle thou, and I shall catch him here!"
But shortly, til that it was verray nyght,	But shortly, until that it was truly night,
They koude nat, though they dide al hir myght,	They could not, though they did al their might,
Hir capul cacche, he ran alwey so faste,	Catch their horse, he ran always so fast,
Til in a dych they caughte hym atte laste.	Until in a ditch they caught him at the last.
Wery and weet, as beest is in the reyn,	Weary and wet, as a beast is in the rain,
Comth sely John, and with him comth Aleyn.	Comes hapless John, and with him comes Aleyn.
"Allas," quod John, "the day that I was born!	"Alas," said John, "the day that I was born!
Now are we dryve til hethyng and til scorn.	Now are we driven to contempt and to scorn.
Oure corn is stoln; men wil us fooles calle,	Our grain is stolen; men will call us fools,
Bathe the wardeyn and oure felawes alle,	Both the warden and all our fellows,
And namely the millere, weylaway!"	And namely the miller, wellaway!"
Thus pleyneth John as he gooth by the way	Thus laments John as he goes by the way
Toward the mille, and Bayard in his hond.	Toward the mill, and the horse Bayard in his hand.
The millere sittynge by the fyr he fond,	The miller sitting by the fire he found,
For it was nyght, and forther myghte they noght;	For it was night, and further they could not go;
But for the love of God they hym bisoght	But for the love of God they ask him
Of herberwe and of ese, as for hir peny.	For lodging and for refreshment, for their cash.
The millere seyde agayn, "If ther be eny,	The miller said in reply, "If there be any,
Swich as it is, yet shal ye have youre part.	Such as it is, yet shall you have your share.
Myn hous is streit, but ye han lerned art;	My house is small, but you have learned the art of logic;
Ye konne by argumentes make a place	You know how by logical arguments to make a place
A myle brood of twenty foot of space.	A mile broad out of twenty feet of space.
Lat se now if this place may suffise,	Let's see now if this place may suffice,
Or make it rowm with speche, as is youre gise."	Or make it large by speech, as is your custom."
"Now, Symond," seyde John, "by Seint Cutberd,	"Now, Symond," said John, "by Saint Cuthbert,
Ay is thou myrie, and this is faire answerd.	Thou art always joking, and this is nicely answered.
I have herd seyd, `Man sal taa of twa thynges:	I have heard said, `Man shall take one of two things:
Slyk as he fyndes, or taa slyk as he brynges.'	Such as he finds, or take such as he brings.'
But specially I pray thee, hooste deere,	But specially I pray thee, host dear,
Get us som mete and drynke, and make us cheere,	Get us some food and drink, and make us good cheer,
And we wil payen trewely atte fulle.	And we will pay truly at the full.
With empty hand men may na haukes tulle;	With empty hand men may lure no hawks;
Loo, heere oure silver, redy for to spende."	Lo, here is our silver, ready to spend."
This millere into toun his doghter sende	This miller into town his daughter sent
For ale and breed, and rosted hem a goos,	For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,
And boond hire hors, it sholde namoore go loos,	And tied up their horse, it should no more go loose,
And in his owene chambre hem made a bed,	And in his own bedroom made them a bed,
With sheetes and with chalons faire yspred	With sheets and with blankets nicely spread
Noght from his owene bed ten foot or twelve.	Not ten feet or twelve from his own bed.
His doghter hadde a bed, al by hirselve,	His daughter had a bed, all by herself,
Right in the same chambre by and by.	Right in the same chamber side by side.
It myghte be no bet, and cause why?	It could be no better, and (do you know) the cause why?
Ther was no roumer herberwe in the place.	There was no larger lodging in the place.
They soupen and they speke, hem to solace,	They sup and they converse, to entertain themselves,
And drynken evere strong ale atte beste.	And drink ever strong ale of the best quality.
Aboute mydnyght wente they to reste.	About midnight they went to bed.
Wel hath this millere vernysshed his heed;	Well has this miller varnished his head (drank heavily);
Ful pale he was for dronken, and nat reed.	Full pale he was for drunkenness, and not red.
He yexeth, and he speketh thurgh the nose	He belches, and he speaks through the nose
As he were on the quakke, or on the pose.	As if he had hoarseness, or had a cold.
To bedde he goth, and with hym goth his wyf.	To bed he goes, and with him goes his wife.
As any jay she light was and jolyf,	She was as cheerful and jolly as any jay,
So was hir joly whistle wel ywet.	So was her jolly whistle well wetted.
The cradel at hir beddes feet is set,	The cradle at her bed's feet is set,
To rokken, and to yeve the child to sowke.	To rock, and to give the child to suck.
And whan that dronken al was in the crowke,	And when all that was in the crock was drunk,
To bedde wente the doghter right anon;	To bed went the daughter right away;
To bedde goth Aleyn and also John;	To bed goes Aleyn and also John;
Ther nas na moore -- hem nedede no dwale.	There was no more -- they needed no sleeping potion.
This millere hath so wisely bibbed ale	This miller has imbibed so much ale
That as an hors he fnorteth in his sleep,	That he snorts like a horse in his sleep,
Ne of his tayl bihynde he took no keep.	And of his tail behind he took no heed.
His wyf bar hym a burdon, a ful strong;	His wife bore him a bass accompaniment, very loud;
Men myghte hir rowtyng heere two furlong;	One could hear their snoring two furlongs away;
The wenche rowteth eek, par compaignye.	The wench snores also, to keep them company.
Aleyn the clerk, that herde this melodye,	Aleyn the clerk, who heard this melody,
He poked John, and seyde, "Slepestow?	He poked John, and said, "Sleepest thou?
Herdestow evere slyk a sang er now?	Heardest thou ever such a song before now?
Lo, swilk a complyn is ymel hem alle;	Lo, such a compline (evening service) is made by them all;
A wilde fyr upon thair bodyes falle!	May a wild fire upon their bodies fall!
Wha herkned evere slyk a ferly thyng?	Who heard ever such an amazing thing?
Ye, they sal have the flour of il endyng.	Yes, they shall have the best (i.e., the worst) of a bad ending.
This lange nyght ther tydes me na reste;	This long night there comes to me no sleep;
But yet, na fors, al sal be for the beste.	But yet, no matter, all shall be for the best.
For, John," seyde he, "als evere moot I thryve,	For, John," said he, "as ever I may thrive,
If that I may, yon wenche wil I swyve.	If I can, yon wench will I screw.
Som esement has lawe yshapen us,	Some redress the law has shaped for us,
For, John, ther is a lawe that says thus:	For, John, there is a law that says thus:
That gif a man in a point be agreved,	That if a man in one point is injured,
That in another he sal be releved.	That in another he shall be relieved.
Oure corn is stoln, sothly, it is na nay,	Our grain is stolen, truly, it can not be denied,
And we han had an il fit al this day;	And we have had a hard time all this day;
And syn I sal have neen amendement	And since I shall have no recompense
Agayn my los, I will have esement.	For my loss, I will have satisfaction.
By Goddes sale, it sal neen other bee!"	By God's soul, it shall be no other way!"
This John answerde, "Alayn, avyse thee!	This John answered, "Alayn, be careful!
The millere is a perilous man," he seyde,	The miller is a perilous man," he said,
"And gif that he out of his sleep abreyde,	"And if he out of his sleep suddenly awoke,
He myghte doon us bathe a vileynye."	He might do injury to us both."
Aleyn answerde, "I counte hym nat a flye."	Aleyn answered, "I reckon him not worth a fly."
And up he rist, and by the wenche he crepte.	And up he rises, and by the wench he crept.
This wenche lay uprighte and faste slepte,	This wench lay on her back and fast slept,
Til he so ny was, er she myghte espie,	Until he was so near, before she could see him,
That it had been to late for to crie,	It was too late to cry out,
And shortly for to seyn, they were aton.	And shortly to speak, they were together.
Now pley, Aleyn, for I wol speke of John.	Now play, Aleyn, for I will speak of John.
This John lith stille a furlong wey or two,	This John lies still five minutes or so,
And to hymself he maketh routhe and wo.	And to himself he laments and feels sorry.
"Allas!" quod he, "this is a wikked jape;	"Alas!" said he, "this is a wicked trick;
Now may I seyn that I is but an ape.	Now may I say that I am nothing but a fool.
Yet has my felawe somwhat for his harm;	Yet has my fellow something for his harm;
He has the milleris doghter in his arm.	He has the miller's daughter in his arm.
He auntred hym, and has his nedes sped,	He took a risk, and has accomplished his purpose,
And I lye as a draf-sak in my bed;	And I lie like a sack of rubbish in my bed;
And when this jape is tald another day,	And when this trick is told another day,
I sal been halde a daf, a cokenay!	I shall be considered a fool, a weakling!
I wil arise and auntre it, by my fayth!	I will arise and chance it, by my faith!
`Unhardy is unseely,' thus men sayth."	`The timid one is unlucky,' thus people say."
And up he roos, and softely he wente	And up he rose, and quietly he went
Unto the cradel, and in his hand it hente,	To the cradle, and in his hand seized it,
And baar it softe unto his beddes feet.	And carried it quietly to the foot of his bed.
Soone after this the wyf hir rowtyng leet,	Soon after this the wife stopped her snoring,
And gan awake, and wente hire out to pisse,	And awoke, and went out to piss,
And cam agayn, and gan hir cradel mysse,	And came back, and began to miss her cradle,
And groped heer and ther, but she foond noon.	And groped here and there, but she found none.
"Allas!" quod she, "I hadde almoost mysgoon;	"Alas!" said she, "I had almost gone wrong;
I hadde almoost goon to the clerkes bed.	I had almost gone to the clerks' bed.
Ey, benedicite! Thanne hadde I foule ysped!"	Ay, bless me! Then I would have made a mess of it!"
And forth she gooth til she the cradel fond.	And forth she goes until she found the cradle.
She gropeth alwey forther with hir hond,	She gropes always further with her hand,
And foond the bed, and thoghte noght but good,	And found the bed, and thought all was well,
By cause that the cradel by it stood,	Because the cradle by it stood,
And nyste wher she was, for it was derk;	And did not know where she was, for it was dark;
But faire and wel she creep in to the clerk,	But gently she crept in to the clerk,
And lith ful stille, and wolde han caught a sleep.	And lies full still, and would have gone to sleep.
Withinne a while this John the clerk up leep,	Within a moment this John the clerk leaped up,
And on this goode wyf he leith on soore.	And on this good wife he lays on vigorously.
So myrie a fit ne hadde she nat ful yoore;	She had not had so merry an experience for a long time;
He priketh harde and depe as he were mad.	He stabs hard and deep as if he were mad.
This joly lyf han thise two clerkes lad	This jolly life have these two clerks led
Til that the thridde cok bigan to synge.	Until the third cock began to sing (an hour before dawn).
Aleyn wax wery in the dawenynge,	Aleyn grew weary at the time of dawn,
For he had swonken al the longe nyght,	For he had labored all the long night,
And seyde, "Fare weel, Malyne, sweete wight!	And said, "Farewell, Malyne, sweet creature!
The day is come; I may no lenger byde;	The day is come; I may no longer remain here;
But everemo, wher so I go or ryde,	But evermore, wherever I walk or ride,
I is thyn awen clerk, swa have I seel!"	I am thine own clerk, as I may prosper!"
"Now, deere lemman," quod she, "go, far weel!	"Now, dear sweetheart," said she, "go, farewell!
But er thow go, o thyng I wol thee telle:	But before thou go, one thing I will tell thee:
Whan that thou wendest homward by the melle,	When thou go homeward by the mill,
Right at the entree of the dore bihynde	Right at the entry behind the door
Thou shalt a cake of half a busshel fynde	Thou shalt find a cake of half a bushel
That was ymaked of thyn owene mele,	That was made of thine own meal,
Which that I heelp my sire for to stele.	Which I helped my father to steal.
And, goode lemman, God thee save and kepe!"	And, good sweetheart, God save and keep thee!"
And with that word almoost she gan to wepe.	And with that word she almost began to weep.
Aleyn up rist, and thoughte, "Er that it dawe,	Aleyn up rises, and thought, "Before it dawns,
I wol go crepen in by my felawe,"	I will go creep in by my fellow,"
And fond the cradel with his hand anon.	And found the cradle with his hand right away.
"By God," thoughte he, "al wrang I have mysgon.	"By God," thought he, "I have gone all wrong.
Myn heed is toty of my swynk to-nyght,	My head is dizzy from my work to-night,
That makes me that I ga nat aright.	That makes me go not right.
I woot wel by the cradel I have mysgo;	I know well by the cradle I have gone wrong;
Heere lith the millere and his wyf also."	Here lies the miller and his wife also."
And forth he goth, a twenty devel way,	And forth he goes, in the name of twenty devils,
Unto the bed ther as the millere lay.	Unto the bed where the miller lay.
He wende have cropen by his felawe John,	He expected to have crept in by his fellow John,
And by the millere in he creep anon,	And in by the miller he crept right then,
And caughte hym by the nekke, and softe he spak.	And caught him by the neck, and quietly he spoke.
He seyde, "Thou John, thou swynes-heed, awak,	He said, "Thou John, thou pig's-head, awake,
For Cristes saule, and heer a noble game.	For Christ's soul, and hear a real joke.
For by that lord that called is Seint Jame,	For by that lord that is called Saint James,
As I have thries in this shorte nyght	I have three times in this short night
Swyved the milleres doghter bolt upright,	Screwed the miller's daughter flat on her back,
Whil thow hast, as a coward, been agast."	While thou hast, like a coward, been terrified."
"Ye, false harlot," quod the millere, "hast?	"Yes, false scoundrel," said the miller, "hast (thou done so)?
A, false traitour! False clerk!" quod he,	Ah, false traitor! False clerk!" said he,
"Thow shalt be deed, by Goddes dignitee!	"Thou shalt be dead, by God's worthiness!
Who dorste be so boold to disparage	Who dared be so bold to degrade
My doghter, that is come of swich lynage?"	My daughter, who is come from such noble lineage?"
And by the throte-bolle he caughte Alayn,	And by the Adam's apple he caught Alayn,
And he hente hym despitously agayn,	And he seized him angrily in turn,
And on the nose he smoot hym with his fest.	And on the nose he smote him with his fist.
Doun ran the blody streem upon his brest;	Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast;
And in the floor, with nose and mouth tobroke,	And on the floor, with nose and mouth badly broken,
They walwe as doon two pigges in a poke;	They wallow as do two pigs in a bag;
And up they goon, and doun agayn anon,	And up they go, and down again straightway,
Til that the millere sporned at a stoon,	Until the miller stumbled on a stone,
And doun he fil bakward upon his wyf,	And down he fell backward upon his wife,
That wiste no thyng of this nyce stryf;	Who knew nothing of this foolish strife;
For she was falle aslepe a lite wight	For she was fallen asleep a little bit
With John the clerk, that waked hadde al nyght,	With John the clerk, who had been awake all night,
And with the fal out of hir sleep she breyde.	And with the fall out of her sleep she started up.
"Help! hooly croys of Bromeholm," she seyde,	"Help! holy cross of Bromeholm," she said,
"In manus tuas! Lord, to thee I calle!	"In your hands! Lord, to Thee I call!
Awak, Symond! The feend is on me falle.	Awake, Symond! The fiend has fallen on me.
Myn herte is broken; help! I nam but deed!	My heart is broken; help! I am as good as dead!
Ther lyth oon upon my wombe and on myn heed.	There lies one upon my belly and one on my head.
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerkes fighte!"	Help, Symkyn, for the false clerks fight!"
This John stirte up as faste as ever he myghte,	This John started up as fast as ever he could,
And graspeth by the walles to and fro,	And grasps by the walls to and fro,
To fynde a staf; and she stirte up also,	To find a staff; and she leaped up also,
And knew the estres bet than dide this John,	And knew the interior of the house better than did this John,
And by the wal a staf she foond anon,	And by the wall a staff she found right away,
And saugh a litel shymeryng of a light,	And saw a little glimmering of a light,
For at an hole in shoon the moone bright,	For at a hole in shone the moon bright,
And by that light she saugh hem bothe two,	And by that light she saw both the two of them,
But sikerly she nyste who was who,	But surely she did not know who was who,
But as she saugh a whit thyng in hir ye.	But she saw a white thing in her eye.
And whan she gan this white thyng espye,	And when she did espy this white thing,
She wende the clerk hadde wered a volupeer,	She thought the clerk had worn a night cap,
And with the staf she drow ay neer and neer,	And with the staff she drew ever nearer and nearer,
And wende han hit this Aleyn at the fulle,	And intended to have hit this Aleyn squarely,
And smoot the millere on the pyled skulle,	And smote the miller on the bald skull,
That doun he gooth, and cride, "Harrow! I dye!"	So that down he goes, and cried, "Help! I die!"
Thise clerkes beete hym weel and lete hym lye,	These clerks beat him well and let him lie,
And greythen hem, and tooke hir hors anon,	And dress themselves, and took their horse straightway,
And eek hire mele, and on hir wey they gon.	And also their meal, and on their way they go.
And at the mille yet they tooke hir cake	And at the mill yet they took their cake
Of half a busshel flour, ful wel ybake.	Of half a bushel flour, very well baked.
Thus is the proude millere wel ybete,	Thus is the proud miller well beaten,
And hath ylost the gryndynge of the whete,	And has lost the charge for grinding of the wheat,
And payed for the soper everideel	And paid for the supper every bit
Of Aleyn and of John, that bette hym weel.	Of Aleyn and of John, who beat him well.
His wyf is swyved, and his doghter als.	His wife is screwed, and his daughter also.
Lo, swich it is a millere to be fals!	Lo, this is how it is when a miller is false!
And therfore this proverbe is seyd ful sooth,	And therefore this proverb is said very truly,
"Hym thar nat wene wel that yvele dooth."	"One who does evil should not expect good."
A gylour shal hymself bigyled be.	A trickster shall himself be tricked.
And God, that sitteth heighe in magestee,	And God, that sits high in majesty,
Save al this compaignye, grete and smale!	Save al this company, high ranking and low (every one)!
Thus have I quyt the Millere in my tale.	Thus have I repaid the Miller in my tale.
Heere is ended the Reves Tale.	Here ends the Reeves Tale.
Whan seyd was al this miracle, every man	When all this miracle was told, every man
As sobre was that wonder was to se,	Was so sober that it was wonderful to see,
Til that oure Hooste japen tho bigan,	Until our Host then began to joke
And thanne at erst he looked upon me,	And then for the first time he looked at me,
And seyde thus: "What man artow?" quod he;	And said thus: "What sort of man art thou?" said he;
"Thou lookest as thou woldest fynde an hare,	"Thou lookest as if thou would track a hare,
For evere upon the ground I se thee stare.	For ever upon the ground I see thee stare.
"Approche neer, and looke up murily.	" Approach nearer, and look up merrily.
Now war yow, sires, and lat this man have place!	Now make way, sirs, and let this man have room!
He in the waast is shape as wel as I;	He in the waist is shaped as well as I;
This were a popet in an arm t' enbrace	This would be a little doll in an arm to embrace
For any womman, small and fair of face.	For any woman, small and fair of face.
He semeth elvyssh by his contenaunce,	He seems otherworldly in his behavior,
For unto no wight dooth he daliaunce.	For unto no person is he sociable:
"Sey now somwhat, syn oother folk han sayd;	"Say something now, since other folk have spoken;
Telle us a tale of myrthe, and that anon."	Tell us a tale of mirth, and that right now."
"Hooste," quod I, "ne beth nat yvele apayd,	"Host," said I, "be not displeased,
For oother tale certes kan I noon,	For certainly I know no other tale,
But of a rym I lerned longe agoon."	Except for a riming romance I learned long ago."
"Ye, that is good," quod he; "now shul we heere	"Yes, that is good," said he; "now we shall hear
Som deyntee thyng, me thynketh by his cheere."	Some dainty thing, it seems to me from his appearance."
Heere bigynneth Chaucers Tale of Thopas.	Here begins Chaucer's Tale of Thopas.
Listeth, lordes, in good entent,	Listen, my lords, with good will,
And I wol telle verrayment	And I will tell truly
Of myrthe and of solas,	Of mirth and of pleasure,
Al of a knyght was fair and gent	All about a knight who was fair and gentle
In bataille and in tourneyment;	In battle and in tournament;
His name was sire Thopas.	His name was sir Thopas.
Yborn he was in fer contree,	He was born in a distant land,
In Flaundres, al biyonde the see,	In Flanders, far beyond the sea,
At Poperyng, in the place.	At Popering, in that place.
His fader was a man ful free,	His father was a very noble man,
And lord he was of that contree,	And he was lord of that country,
As it was Goddes grace.	Since it was God's will.
Sire Thopas wax a doghty swayn;	Sir Thopas grew up to be a doughty lad;
Whit was his face as payndemayn,	White was his face as fine white bread,
His lippes rede as rose;	His lips red as a rose;
His rode is lyk scarlet in grayn,	His complexion is like scarlet deeply dyed,
And I yow telle in good certayn	And I tell you in true certainty
He hadde a semely nose.	He had a seemly nose.
His heer, his berd was lyk saffroun,	His hair, his beard was like saffron,
That to his girdel raughte adoun;	That to his girdle reached down;
His shoon of cordewane.	His shoes of Cordovan leather.
Of Brugges were his hosen broun,	Of Bruges were his brown stockings,
His robe was of syklatoun,	His robe was of silk woven with gold,
That coste many a jane.	That cost many a half-penny.
He koude hunte at wilde deer,	He knew how to hunt for wild animals,
And ride an haukyng for river	And ride a-hawking for water-fowl
With grey goshauk on honde;	With grey gos-hawk on hand;
Therto he was a good archeer;	Moreover he was a good archer;
Of wrastlyng was ther noon his peer,	In wrestling there was no one his peer,
Ther any ram shal stonde.	Where any ram shall stand (as a prize).
Ful many a mayde, bright in bour,	Very many a maid, bright in bed-chamber,
They moorne for hym paramour,	They mourn for him passionately,
Whan hem were bet to slepe;	When it would be better for them to sleep;
But he was chaast and no lechour,	But he was chaste and no lecher,
And sweete as is the brembul flour	And sweet as is the dog rose
That bereth the rede hepe.	That bears the red hip.
And so bifel upon a day,	And it so happened upon a day,
For sothe, as I yow telle may,	In truth, as I can tell you,
Sire Thopas wolde out ride.	Sir Thopas wanted to ride out.
He worth upon his steede gray,	He mounted upon his gray steed,
And in his hand a launcegay,	And in his hand a light lance,
A long swerd by his side.	A long sword by his side.
He priketh thurgh a fair forest,	He spurs through a fair forest,
Therinne is many a wilde best,	In which is many a wild best,
Ye, bothe bukke and hare;	Yea, both buck and hare;
And as he priketh north and est,	And as he spurs north and east,
I telle it yow, hym hadde almest	I tell it you, to him had almost
Bitid a sory care.	Happened a grievous misfortune.
Ther spryngen herbes grete and smale,	There spring herbs large and small,
The lycorys and the cetewale,	The licorice and the zedoary,
And many a clowe-gylofre;	And many a clove-gillyflower;
And notemuge to putte in ale,	And nutmeg to put in ale,
Wheither it be moyste or stale,	Whether it be new or old,
Or for to leye in cofre.	Or to lay in a clothes press.
The briddes synge, it is no nay,	The birds sing, it can not be denied,
The sparhauk and the papejay,	The sparrow hawk and the parrot,
That joye it was to heere;	That it was joy to hear;
The thrustelcok made eek hir lay,	The male thrush made also her lay,
The wodedowve upon the spray	The wood-pigeon upon the branch
She sang ful loude and cleere.	She sang very loud and clear.
Sire Thopas fil in love-longynge,	Sir Thopas fell in a yearning for love,
Al whan he herde the thrustel synge,	As soon as he heard the thrush sing,
And pryked as he were wood.	And spurred as if he were crazy.
His faire steede in his prikynge	His fair steed in his spurring
So swatte that men myghte him wrynge;	So sweated that one could wring him;
His sydes were al blood.	His sides were all blood.
Sire Thopas eek so wery was	Sir Thopas also so weary was
For prikyng on the softe gras,	For spurring on the soft grass,
So fiers was his corage,	So fierce was his heart,
That doun he leyde him in that plas	That down he laid him in that place
To make his steede som solas,	To give his steed some rest,
And yaf hym good forage.	And gave him good dry fodder.
"O Seinte Marie, benedicite!	"O Saint Mary, bless me!
What eyleth this love at me	What does this love have against me
To bynde me so soore?	To bind me so painfully?
Me dremed al this nyght, pardee,	I dreamed all this night, by God,
An elf-queene shal my lemman be	An elf-queen shall be my sweetheart
And slepe under my goore.	And sleep under my cloak.
"An elf-queene wol I love, ywis,	"An elf-queen will I love, indeed,
For in this world no womman is	For in this world no woman is
Worthy to be my make	Worthy to be my mate
In towne;	In town;
Alle othere wommen I forsake,	All other women I forsake,
And to an elf-queene I me take	And to an elf-queen I betake nyself,
By dale and eek by downe!"	By dale and also by hill!"
Into his sadel he clamb anon,	Into his saddle he climbed at once,
And priketh over stile and stoon	And spurs over stile and stone
An elf-queene for t' espye,	An elf-queen for to see,
Til he so longe hath riden and goon	Until he so long had ridden and walked
That he foond, in a pryve woon,	That he found, in a secret place,
The contree of Fairye	The country of Fairy
So wilde;	So wild;
For in that contree was ther noon	For in that country there was no one
That to him durste ride or goon,	Who dared ride or go on foot at him,
Neither wyf ne childe;	Neither woman nor child;
Til that ther cam a greet geaunt,	Until there came a big giant,
His name was sire Olifaunt,	His name was sir Olifaunt,
A perilous man of dede.	A perilous man of deeds.
He seyde, "Child, by Termagaunt,	He said, "Child, by Termagaunt,
But if thou prike out of myn haunt,	Unless thou spur out of my territory,
Anon I sle thy steede	At once I will slay thy steed
With mace.	With mace.
Heere is the queene of Fayerye,	Here is the queen of Fairyland,
With harpe and pipe and symphonye,	With harp and pipe and hurdy-gurdy,
Dwellynge in this place."	Dwelling in this place."
The child seyde, "Also moote I thee,	The child said, "As I may prosper,
Tomorwe wol I meete with thee,	Tomorrow will I meet with thee,
Whan I have myn armoure;	When I have my armor;
And yet I hope, par ma fay,	And yet I trust, by my faith,
That thou shalt with this launcegay	That thou shalt by means of this light lance
Abyen it ful sowre.	Very bitterly pay for it.
Thy mawe	Thy maw
Shal I percen, if I may,	Shall I pierce, if I can,
Er it be fully pryme of day,	Ere it be fully prime of day ( a.m.),
For heere thow shalt be slawe."	For here thou shalt be slain."
Sire Thopas drow abak ful faste;	Sir Thopas drew back very fast;
This geant at hym stones caste	This giant threw stones at him
Out of a fel staf-slynge.	Out of a terrible staff-sling.
But faire escapeth child Thopas,	But child Thopas safely escapes,
And al it was thurgh Goddes gras,	And it was all due to God's grace,
And thurgh his fair berynge.	And due to his fair bearing.
Yet listeth, lordes, to my tale	Yet listen, gentlemen, to my tale
Murier than the nightyngale,	Merrier than the nightingale,
For now I wol yow rowne	For now I will you tell
How sir Thopas, with sydes smale,	How sir Thopas, with slender waist,
Prikyng over hill and dale,	Spurring over hill and dale,
Is comen agayn to towne.	Is come again to town.
His myrie men comanded he	His merry men commanded he
To make hym bothe game and glee,	To make him both amusement and delight,
For nedes moste he fighte	For by necessity he must fight
With a geaunt with hevedes three,	With a giant with three heads,
For paramour and jolitee	For love and pleasure
Of oon that shoon ful brighte.	Of one who shone very bright.
"Do come," he seyde, "my mynstrales,	"Do come," he said, "my musicians,
And geestours for to tellen tales,	And story tellers to tell tales,
Anon in myn armynge,	Right now in my arming,
Of romances that been roiales,	Of romances that are royal,
Of popes and of cardinales,	Of popes and of cardinals,
And eek of love-likynge."	And also of the joys of love."
They fette hym first the sweete wyn,	They fetched him first the sweet wine,
And mede eek in a mazelyn,	And mead also in a maple drinking bowl,
And roial spicerye	And royal delicacies
Of gyngebreed that was ful fyn,	Of gingerbread that was very fine,
And lycorys, and eek comyn,	And licorice, and also cumin,
With sugre that is trye.	With sugar that is excellent.
He dide next his white leere	He put on next to his white flesh
Of cloth of lake fyn and cleere,	Of linen cloth fine and clear,
A breech and eek a sherte;	A pair of trousers and also a shirt;
And next his sherte an aketoun,	And next to his shirt a quilted jacket,
And over that an haubergeoun	And over that a chain-mail shirt
For percynge of his herte;	To prevent piercing of his heart;
And over that a fyn hawberk,	And over that a fine plate armor,
Was al ywroght of Jewes werk,	Which was all wrought with jewelers' work,
Ful strong it was of plate;	Very strong it was of iron plate;
And over that his cote-armour	And over that his surcoat
As whit as is a lilye flour,	As white as is a lily flour,
In which he wol debate.	In which he will dispute.
His sheeld was al of gold so reed,	His shield was all of gold so red,
And therinne was a bores heed,	And on that was a boar's head,
A charbocle bisyde;	Beside a carbuncle (red gem);
And there he swoor on ale and breed	And there he swore on ale and bread
How that the geaunt shal be deed,	How the giant shall be dead,
Bityde what bityde!	Whatever may happen!
His jambeux were of quyrboilly,	His leg guards were of hardened leather,
His swerdes shethe of yvory,	His sword's sheath of ivory,
His helm of latoun bright;	His helm of bright brass;
His sadel was of rewel boon,	His saddle was of ivory,
His brydel as the sonne shoon,	His bridle shone like the sun,
Or as the moone light.	Or like the moon light.
His spere was of fyn ciprees,	His spear was of fine cypress,
That bodeth werre, and nothyng pees,	That foretells war, and nothing of peace,
The heed ful sharpe ygrounde;	The head ground very sharp;
His steede was al dappull gray,	His steed was all dapple gray,
It gooth an ambil in the way	It goes at a slow walk on the way
Ful softely and rounde	Very softly and easily
In londe.	In land.
Loo, lordes myne, heere is a fit!	Lo, my lords, here is a fit!
If ye wol any moore of it,	If you want to hear any more of it,
To telle it wol I fonde.	To tell it will I try
Now holde youre mouth, par charitee,	Now hold your mouth, for kindness, please,
Bothe knyght and lady free,	Both knight and noble lady,
And herkneth to my spelle;	And hearken to my tale;
Of bataille and of chivalry,	Of battle and of chivalry,
And of ladyes love-drury	And of ladies' passionate love
Anon I wol yow telle.	Right now I will you tell.
Men speken of romances of prys,	Men speak of excellent romances,
Of Horn child and of Ypotys,	Of Horn child and of Ypotys,
Of Beves and sir Gy,	Of Bevis of Hampton and sir Guy of Watwick,
Of sir Lybeux and Pleyndamour --	Of sir Lybeux Desconus and Pleyndamour --
But sir Thopas, he bereth the flour	But sir Thopas, he bears the flower
Of roial chivalry!	Of royal chivalry!
His goode steede al he bistrood,	His good steed he mounted
And forth upon his wey he glood	And forth upon his way he glided
As sparcle out of the bronde;	Like a spark out of the burning log;
Upon his creest he bar a tour,	Upon his top of his helmet he bore a tower,
And therinne stiked a lilie flour --	And in that stuck a lily flower --
God shilde his cors fro shonde!	God protect his body from shame!
And for he was a knyght auntrous,	And because he was a knight errent,
He nolde slepen in noon hous,	He would not sleep in any house,
But liggen in his hoode;	But lie in his hood;
His brighte helm was his wonger,	His bright helm was his pillow,
And by hym baiteth his dextrer	And by him his war-horse grazes
Of herbes fyne and goode.	On herbs fine and good.
Hymself drank water of the well,	He himself drank water of the well,
As dide the knyght sire Percyvell	As did the knight sir Perceval
So worly under wede,	So worthy in his armor,
Til on a day --	Until on a day --
"Namoore of this, for Goddes dignitee,"	"No more of this, for God's dignity,"
Quod oure Hooste, "for thou makest me	Said our Host, "for thou makest me
So wery of thy verray lewednesse	So weary of thy true ignorance
That, also wisly God my soule blesse,	That, as surely as God may bless my soul,
Myne eres aken of thy drasty speche.	My ears ache from thy crappy speech.
Now swich a rym the devel I biteche!	Now such a rime I commit to the devil!
This may wel be rym dogerel," quod he.	This may well be doggerel verse," said he.
"Why so?" quod I, "why wiltow lette me	"Why so?" said I, "why wilt thou prevent me
Moore of my tale than another man,	From telling more of my tale than another man,
Syn that it is the beste rym I kan?"	Since it is the best rime I know?"
"By God," quod he, "for pleynly, at a word,	"By God," said he, "for plainly, at one word,
Thy drasty rymyng is nat worth a toord!	Thy crappy riming is not worth a turd!
Thou doost noght elles but despendest tyme.	Thou dost nothing else but waste time.
Sire, at o word, thou shalt no lenger ryme.	Sir, at one word, thou shalt no longer rime.
Lat se wher thou kanst tellen aught in geeste,	Let's see whether thou can tell anything in alliterative verse,
Or telle in prose somwhat, at the leeste,	Or tell something in prose, at the least,
In which ther be som murthe or som doctryne."	In which there may be some mirth or some doctrine."
"Gladly," quod I, "by Goddes sweete pyne!	"Gladly," said I, "by God's sweet pain!
I wol yow telle a litel thyng in prose	I will you tell a little thing in prose
That oghte liken yow, as I suppose,	That ought to please you, as I suppose,
Or elles, certes, ye been to daungerous.	Or else, certainly, you are too hard to please.
It is a moral tale vertuous,	It is a virtuous moral tale,
Al be it told somtyme in sondry wyse	Although it is told sometimes in various ways
Of sondry folk, as I shal yow devyse.	By various folk, as I shall tell you.
"As thus: ye woot that every Evaungelist	"As thus: you know that every Evangelist
That telleth us the peyne of Jhesu Crist	Who tells us of the pain of Jesus Christ
Ne seith nat alle thyng as his felawe dooth;	Does not say everything as his fellow does;
But nathelees hir sentence is al sooth,	But nonetheless their essential meaning is all true,
And alle acorden as in hire sentence,	And all agree in their meaning,
Al be ther in hir tellyng difference.	Although there may be a difference in their telling.
For somme of hem seyn moore, and somme seyn lesse,	For some of them say more, and some say less,
Whan they his pitous passioun expresse --	When they His piteous passion express --
I meene of Mark, Mathew, Luc, and John --	I mean of Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John --
But doutelees hir sentence is al oon.	But doubtless their essential meaning is all the same.
Therfore, lordynges alle, I yow biseche,	Therefore, gentlemen, I beseech you,
If that yow thynke I varie as in my speche,	If you think I vary as in my speech,
As thus, though that I telle somwhat moore	As thus, though I tell something more
Of proverbes than ye han herd bifoore	Of proverbs than you have heard before
Comprehended in this litel tretys heere,	Comprehended in this little treatise here,
To enforce with th' effect of my mateere;	With which to strengthen the effect of my matter;
And though I nat the same wordes seye	And though I do not say the same words
As ye han herd, yet to yow alle I preye	As you have heard, yet to you all I pray
Blameth me nat; for, as in my sentence,	Blame not me; for, in my essential meaning,
Shul ye nowher fynden difference	You shall nowhere find difference
Fro the sentence of this tretys lyte	From the meaning of that little treatise
After the which this murye tale I write.	In imitation of which this merry tale I write.
And therfore herkneth what that I shal seye,	And therefore hearken what I shall say,
And lat me tellen al my tale, I preye."	And let me tell all my tale, I pray."
The Prologe of the Marchantes Tale.	The Prologue of the Merchant's Tale.
"Wepyng and waylyng, care and oother sorwe	"Weeping and wailing, grief and other sorrow
I knowe ynogh, on even and a-morwe,"	I know enough, on evenings and mornings,"
Quod the Marchant, "and so doon other mo	Said the Merchant, "and so do many others
That wedded been. I trowe that it be so,	Who are wedded. I believe that it is so,
For wel I woot it fareth so with me.	For well I know it fares so with me.
I have a wyf, the worste that may be;	I have a wife, the worst that can be;
For thogh the feend to hire ycoupled were,	For though the fiend were married to her,
She wolde hym overmacche, I dar wel swere.	She would outmatch him, I dare well swear.
What sholde I yow reherce in special	Why should I tell you in detail
Hir hye malice? She is a shrewe at al.	Her high malice? She is a shrew in every way.
Ther is a long and large difference	There is a long and large difference
Bitwix Grisildis grete pacience	Between Griselda's great patience
And of my wyf the passyng crueltee.	And the extreme cruelty of my wife
Were I unbounden, also moot I thee,	Were I released (from marriage), so may I may prosper,
I wolde nevere eft comen in the snare.	I would never again come in the snare.
We wedded men lyven in sorwe and care.	We wedded men live in sorrow and care.
Assaye whoso wole, and he shal fynde	Try it whoso will, and he shall find
That I seye sooth, by Seint Thomas of Ynde,	That I say truth, by Saint Thomas of India,
As for the moore part -- I sey nat alle.	As for the greater part (majority) -- I say not all.
God shilde that it sholde so bifalle!	God prevent that it should so happen!
"A, goode sire Hoost, I have ywedded bee	"A, good sir Host, I have been wedded
Thise monthes two, and moore nat, pardee;	These two months, and no more, by God;
And yet, I trowe, he that al his lyve	And yet, I believe, he who all his life
Wyflees hath been, though that men wolde him ryve	Wifeless has been, though one would him stab
Unto the herte, ne koude in no manere	Unto the heart, could not in any way
Tellen so muchel sorwe as I now heere	Tell so much sorrow as I now here
Koude tellen of my wyves cursednesse!"	Could tell of my wife's cursedness!"
"Now," quod oure Hoost, "Marchaunt, so God yow blesse,	"Now," said our Host, "Merchant, as God may you bless,
Syn ye so muchel knowen of that art	Since you know so much of that art
Ful hertely I pray yow telle us part."	Full heartily I pray you tell us part."
"Gladly," quod he, "but of myn owene soore,	"Gladly," said he, "but of my own sorrow,
For soory herte, I telle may namoore."	For sorry heart, I can tell no more."
Heere bigynneth the Marchantes Tale.	Here begins the Merchant's Tale.
Whilom ther was dwellynge in Lumbardye	Once there was dwelling in Lombardy
A worthy knyght, that born was of Pavye,	A worthy knight, who was born in Pavia,
In which he lyved in greet prosperitee;	In which he lived in great prosperity;
And sixty yeer a wyflees man was hee,	And sixty years a wifeless man was he,
And folwed ay his bodily delyt	And followed always his bodily desire
On wommen, ther as was his appetyt,	On women, where was his appetite,
As doon thise fooles that been seculeer.	As do these fools that are secular.
And whan that he was passed sixty yeer,	And when he was passed sixty years,
Were it for hoolynesse or for dotage	Were it for holiness or for dotage
I kan nat seye, but swich a greet corage	I can not say, but such a great desire
Hadde this knyght to been a wedded man	Had this knight to be a wedded man
That day and nyght he dooth al that he kan	That day and night he does all he can
T' espien where he myghte wedded be,	To discover where he might wedded be,
Preyinge oure Lord to graunten him that he	Praying our Lord to grant him that he
Mighte ones knowe of thilke blisful lyf	Might once know of that blissful life
That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf,	That is between a husband and his wife,
And for to lyve under that hooly boond	And to live under that holy bond
With which that first God man and womman bond.	With which God first bound man and woman.
"Noon oother lyf," seyde he, "is worth a bene,	"No other life," said he, "is worth a bean,
For wedlok is so esy and so clene,	For wedlock is so easy and so pure,
That in this world it is a paradys."	That in this world it is a paradise."
Thus seyde this olde knyght, that was so wys.	Thus said this old knight, who was so wise.
And certeinly, as sooth as God is kyng,	And certainly, as truly as God is king,
To take a wyf it is a glorious thyng,	To take a wife it is a glorious thing,
And namely whan a man is oold and hoor;	And especially when a man is old and white-haired;
Thanne is a wyf the fruyt of his tresor.	Then is a wife the best part of his treasure.
Thanne sholde he take a yong wyf and a feir,	Then should he take a young wife and a fair,
On which he myghte engendren hym an heir,	On which he might engender himself an heir,
And lede his lyf in joye and in solas,	And lead his life in joy and in pleasure,
Where as thise bacheleris synge "allas,"	Whereas these bachelors sing "alas,"
Whan that they fynden any adversitee	When they find any adversity
In love, which nys but childyssh vanytee.	In love, which is nothing but childish vanity.
And trewely it sit wel to be so,	And truly it is fitting to be thus,
That bacheleris have often peyne and wo;	That bachelors have often pain and woe;
On brotel ground they buylde, and brotelnesse	On brittle ground they build, and insecurity
They fynde whan they wene sikernesse.	They find when they expect security.
They lyve but as a bryd or as a beest,	They live but as a bird or as a beast,
In libertee and under noon arreest,	In liberty and under no restraint,
Ther as a wedded man in his estaat	Whereas a wedded man in his estate
Lyveth a lyf blisful and ordinaat	Lives a blissful and orderly life
Under this yok of mariage ybounde.	Bound under this yoke of marriage.
Wel may his herte in joy and blisse habounde,	Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound,
For who kan be so buxom as a wyf?	For who can be so obedient as a wife?
Who is so trewe, and eek so ententyf	Who is so true, and also so eager
To kepe hym, syk and hool, as is his make?	To care for him, sick and well, as is his mate?
For wele or wo she wole hym nat forsake;	For happiness or woe she will not forsake him;
She nys nat wery hym to love and serve,	She is not weary of loving and serving him,
Though that he lye bedrede til he sterve.	Though he lie bedridden until he dies.
And yet somme clerkes seyn it nys nat so,	And yet some clerks say it is not so,
Of whiche he Theofraste is oon of tho.	Of which that Theofrastus is one of those.
What force though Theofraste liste lye?	What does it matter though Theofrastus wants to lie?
"Ne take no wyf," quod he, "for housbondrye,	"Take no wife," said he, "for managing the household,
As for to spare in houshold thy dispence.	As to economize in thy household expenditures.
A trewe servant dooth moore diligence	A true servant does more diligence
Thy good to kepe than thyn owene wyf,	To guard thy goods than thine own wife,
For she wol clayme half part al hir lyf.	For she will claim half part all her life.
And if thou be syk, so God me save,	And if thou be sick, as God may save me,
Thy verray freendes, or a trewe knave,	Thy real friends, or a true servant,
Wol kepe thee bet than she that waiteth ay	Will take care of thee better than she that waits always
After thy good and hath doon many a day.	To inherit thy goods and has done so many a day.
And if thou take a wyf unto thyn hoold	And if thou take a wife unto thy household
Ful lightly maystow been a cokewold."	Full easily canst thou be a cuckold."
This sentence, and an hundred thynges worse,	This opinion, and a hundred things worse,
Writeth this man, ther God his bones corse!	Writes this man, may God his bones curse!
But take no kep of al swich vanytee;	But take no heed of all such foolishness;
Deffie Theofraste, and herke me.	Defy Theofrastus, and listen to me.
A wyf is Goddes yifte verraily;	A wife is God's gift truly;
Alle othere manere yiftes hardily,	All other sorts of gifts certainly,
As londes, rentes, pasture, or commune,	Such as lands, rents, pasture, or right to use common land,
Or moebles -- alle been yiftes of Fortune	Or personal possessions -- all are gifts of Fortune
That passen as a shadwe upon a wal.	That pass like a shadow upon a wall.
But drede nat, if pleynly speke I shal:	But doubt not, if I shall speak plainly:
A wyf wol laste, and in thyn hous endure,	A wife will last, and in thy house endure,
Wel lenger than thee list, paraventure.	Well longer than thou will wish, indeed.
Mariage is a ful greet sacrement.	Marriage is a full great sacrament.
He which that hath no wyf, I holde hym shent;	He who has no wife, I consider him ruined;
He lyveth helplees and al desolat --	He lives helpless and all desolate --
I speke of folk in seculer estaat.	I speak of folk in secular life.
And herke why -- I sey nat this for noght --	And hearken why -- I say not this for nothing --
That womman is for mannes helpe ywroght.	That woman is created for man's help.
The hye God, whan he hadde Adam maked,	The high God, when he had made Adam,
And saugh him al allone, bely-naked,	And saw him all alone, stark naked,
God of his grete goodnesse seyde than,	God of his great goodness said then,
"Lat us now make an helpe unto this man	"Let us now make a helper for this man
Lyk to hymself"; and thanne he made him Eve.	Like to himself"; and then he made him Eve.
Heere may ye se, and heerby may ye preve,	Here can you see, and hereby can you prove,
That wyf is mannes helpe and his confort,	That wife is man's help and his comfort,
His paradys terrestre, and his disport.	His earthly paradise, and his source of consolation.
So buxom and so vertuous is she,	So obedient and so virtuous is she,
They moste nedes lyve in unitee.	They must necessarily live in unity.
O flessh they been, and o fleesh, as I gesse,	One flesh they are, and one flesh, as I guess,
Hath but oon herte, in wele and in distresse.	Has but one heart, in prosperity and in distress.
A wyf! a, Seinte Marie, benedicite!	A wife! A, Saint Mary, bless me!
How myghte a man han any adversitee	How could a man have any adversity
That hath a wyf? Certes, I kan nat seye.	That has a wife? Certainly, I can not say.
The blisse which that is bitwixe hem tweye	The bliss that is betwixt them two
Ther may no tonge telle, or herte thynke.	There can no tongue tell, nor heart think.
If he be povre, she helpeth hym to swynke;	If he be poor, she helps him to work;
She kepeth his good, and wasteth never a deel;	She keeps his goods, and wastes not a bit;
Al that hire housbonde lust, hire liketh weel;	All that her husband desires, well pleases her;
She seith nat ones "nay," whan he seith "ye."	She says not once "nay," when he says "yea."
"Do this," seith he; "Al redy, sire," seith she.	"Do this," says he; "All ready, sir," says she.
O blisful ordre of wedlok precious,	O blissful order of wedlock precious,
Thou art so murye, and eek so vertuous,	Thou art so merry, and also so virtuous,
And so commended and appreved eek	And so commended and approved also
That every man that halt hym worth a leek	That every man that considers himself worth a leek
Upon his bare knees oughte al his lyf	Upon his bare knees ought all his life
Thanken his God that hym hath sent a wyf,	To thank his God that has sent him a wife,
Or elles preye to God hym for to sende	Or else pray to God to send him
A wyf to laste unto his lyves ende.	A wife to last unto his life's end.
For thanne his lyf is set in sikernesse;	For then his life is set in security;
He may nat be deceyved, as I gesse,	He may not be deceived, as I guess,
So that he werke after his wyves reed.	Providing that he work according to his wife's advice.
Thanne may he boldely beren up his heed,	Then may he boldly bear up his head,
They been so trewe and therwithal so wyse;	They are so true and therewithal so wise;
For which, if thou wolt werken as the wyse,	For which, if thou will act like a wise man,
Do alwey so as wommen wol thee rede.	Do always as women will advise thee.
Lo, how that Jacob, as thise clerkes rede,	Lo, how Jacob, as these clerks tell,
By good conseil of his mooder Rebekke,	By good counsel of his mother Rebecca,
Boond the kydes skyn aboute his nekke,	Bound the kid's skin about his neck,
For which his fadres benyson he wan.	For which his father's blessing he won.
Lo Judith, as the storie eek telle kan,	Lo Judith, as the story also can tell,
By wys conseil she Goddes peple kepte,	By wise counsel she God's people kept,
And slow hym Olofernus, whil he slepte.	And slew that Holofernes, while he slept.
Lo Abigayl, by good conseil how she	Lo Abigail, by good counsel how she
Saved hir housbonde Nabal whan that he	Saved her husband Nabal when he
Sholde han be slayn; and looke, Ester also	Should have been slain; and look, Esther also
By good conseil delyvered out of wo	By good counsel delivered out of woe
The peple of God, and made hym Mardochee	The people of God, and made that same Mordecai
Of Assuere enhaunced for to be.	To be exalted by Ahasuerus.
Ther nys no thyng in gree superlatyf,	There is no thing superior (in degree of virtue),
As seith Senek, above an humble wyf.	As says Seneca, above a humble wife.
Suffre thy wyves tonge, as Catoun bit;	Submit to thy wife's tongue, as Cato bids;
She shal comande, and thou shalt suffren it,	She shall command, and thou shalt submit to it,
And yet she wole obeye of curteisye.	And yet she will (seem to) obey by way of courtesy.
A wyf is kepere of thyn housbondrye;	A wife is keeper of thy household;
Wel may the sike man biwaille and wepe,	Well may the sick man bewail and weep,
Ther as ther nys no wyf the hous to kepe.	Where there is no wife to keep the house.
I warne thee, if wisely thou wolt wirche,	I warn thee, if wisely thou wilt act,
Love wel thy wyf, as Crist loved his chirche.	Love well thy wife, as Christ loved his church.
If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wyf;	If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wife;
No man hateth his flessh, but in his lyf	No man hates his flesh, but in his life
He fostreth it, and therfore bidde I thee	He nurtures it, and therefore I bid thee
Cherisse thy wyf, or thou shalt nevere thee.	Cherish thy wife, or thou shalt never prosper.
Housbonde and wyf, what so men jape or pleye,	Husband and wife, however much men may jest or play,
Of worldly folk holden the siker weye;	Of worldly folk hold the secure way;
They been so knyt ther may noon harm bityde,	They are so knit together no harm can there befall,
And namely upon the wyves syde.	And especially upon the wife's side.
For which this Januarie, of whom I tolde,	For which this January, of whom I told,
Considered hath, inwith his dayes olde,	Considered has, in his old age,
The lusty lyf, the vertuous quyete,	The pleasing life, the virtuous quiet,
That is in mariage hony-sweete,	That is in honey-sweet marriage,
And for his freendes on a day he sente,	And for his friends on a day he sent,
To tellen hem th' effect of his entente.	To tell them the substance of his intention.
With face sad his tale he hath hem toold.	With serious face his tale he has them told.
He seyde, "Freendes, I am hoor and oold,	He said, "Friends, I am white-haired and old,
And almoost, God woot, on my pittes brynke;	And almost, God knows, on my grave's brink;
Upon my soule somwhat moste I thynke.	Upon my soul somewhat must I think.
I have my body folily despended;	I have my body foolishly wasted;
Blessed be God that it shal been amended!	Blessed be God that it shall be amended!
For I wol be, certeyn, a wedded man,	For I will be, certainly, a wedded man,
And that anoon in al the haste I kan.	And that at once in all the haste I can (do it).
Unto som mayde fair and tendre of age,	Unto some maid fair and tender of age,
I prey yow, shapeth for my mariage	I pray yow, prepare for my marriage
Al sodeynly, for I wol nat abyde;	Right away, for I will not delay;
And I wol fonde t' espien, on my syde,	And I will attempt to discover, on my side,
To whom I may be wedded hastily.	To whom I may be wedded hastily.
But forasmuche as ye been mo than I,	But forasmuch as you are more than I,
Ye shullen rather swich a thyng espyen	You shall rather such a thing discover
Than I, and where me best were to allyen.	Than I, and where it would be best to ally myself (marry).
"But o thyng warne I yow, my freendes deere,	"But one thing warn I you, my friends dear,
I wol noon oold wyf han in no manere.	I will no old wife have in any way.
She shal nat passe twenty yeer, certayn;	She shall not pass twenty years, certainly;
Oold fissh and yong flessh wolde I have fayn.	Old fish and young flesh would I gladly have.
Bet is," quod he, "a pyk than a pykerel,	Better is," said he, "a pike than a pickerel (young pike),
And bet than old boef is the tendre veel.	And better than old beef is the tender veal.
I wol no womman thritty yeer of age;	I want no woman thirty years of age;
It is but bene-straw and greet forage.	It is but dry bean-stalks and coarse fodder.
And eek thise olde wydwes, God it woot,	And also these old widows, God it knows,
They konne so muchel craft on Wades boot,	They know so much trickery on Wade's boat,
So muchel broken harm, whan that hem leste,	Do so much harm, when they please,
That with hem sholde I nevere lyve in reste.	That with them should I never live in rest.
For sondry scoles maken sotile clerkis;	For various schools make clever clerks;
Womman of manye scoles half a clerk is.	A woman of many schools is half a clerk.
But certeynly, a yong thyng may men gye,	But certainly, one can guide a young thing,
Right as men may warm wex with handes plye.	Just as one can mold warm wax with hands.
Wherfore I sey yow pleynly, in a clause,	Therefore I tell you plainly, in brief,
I wol noon oold wyf han right for this cause.	I will no old wife have at all for this reason.
For if so were I hadde swich myschaunce	For if it so were that I had such bad luck
That I in hire ne koude han no plesaunce,	That I in her could have no pleasure,
Thanne sholde I lede my lyf in avoutrye	Then I should lead my life in adultery
And go streight to the devel whan I dye.	And go straight to the devil when I die.
Ne children sholde I none upon hire geten;	Nor any children should I upon her beget;
Yet were me levere houndes had me eten	Yet I would rather hounds had eaten me
Than that myn heritage sholde falle	Than that my heritage should fall
In straunge hand, and this I telle yow alle.	In a stranger's hand, and this I tell you all.
I dote nat; I woot the cause why	I am not in my dotage; I know the cause why
Men sholde wedde, and forthermoore woot I	One should wed, and furthermore know I
Ther speketh many a man of mariage	There speaks many a man of marriage
That woot namoore of it than woot my page	Who knows no more of it than my servant boy knows
For whiche causes man sholde take a wyf.	For which causes man should take a wife.
If he ne may nat lyven chaast his lyf,	If he can not live his life chastely,
Take hym a wyf with greet devocioun,	Let him take him a wife with great devotion,
By cause of leveful procreacioun	For the sake of lawful procreation
Of children to th' onour of God above,	Of children to the honor of God above,
And nat oonly for paramour or love;	And not only for sexual passion or love;
And for they sholde leccherye eschue,	And so that they should abstain from lechery,
And yelde hir dette whan that it is due;	And yield their marital debt when it is due;
Or for that ech of hem sholde helpen oother	Or so that each of them should help the other
In meschief, as a suster shal the brother,	In distress, as a sister shall the brother,
And lyve in chastitee ful holily.	And live in celibacy full piously.
But sires, by youre leve, that am nat I.	But sirs, by your leave, that am not I.
For -- God be thanked! -- I dar make avaunt	For -- God be thanked! -- I dare make boast
I feele my lymes stark and suffisaunt	I feel my limbs strong and sufficient
To do al that a man bilongeth to;	To do all that is proper to a man;
I woot myselven best what I may do.	I know myself best what I can do.
Though I be hoor, I fare as dooth a tree	Though I be white-haired, I fare as does a tree
That blosmeth er that fruyt ywoxen bee;	That blossoms before the fruit is grown;
And blosmy tree nys neither drye ne deed.	And a blossom-filled tree is neither dry nor dead.
I feele me nowhere hoor but on myn heed;	I feel me nowhere white-haired but on my head;
Myn herte and alle my lymes been as grene	My heart and all my limbs are as green
As laurer thurgh the yeer is for to sene.	As laurel through the year is to be seen.
And syn that ye han herd al myn entente,	And since you have heard all my intention,
I prey yow to my wyl ye wole assente."	I pray you to my will you will assent."
Diverse men diversely hym tolde	Diverse men diversely him told
Of mariage manye ensamples olde.	Of marriage many old examples.
Somme blamed it, somme preysed it, certeyn,	Somme blamed it, some praised it, certainly,
But atte laste, shortly for to seyn,	But at the last, shortly to say,
As al day falleth altercacioun	As every day altercation occurs
Bitwixen freendes in disputisoun,	Between friends in disputation,
Ther fil a stryf bitwixe his bretheren two,	There befell a strife betwixt his two brothers,
Of whiche that oon was cleped Placebo;	Of whom that one was called Placebo;
Justinus soothly called was that oother.	Justinus truly was called that other.
Placebo seyde, "O Januarie, brother,	Placebo said, "O January, brother,
Ful litel nede hadde ye, my lord so deere,	Full little need had you, my lord so dear,
Conseil to axe of any that is heere,	To ask counsel of any that is here,
But that ye been so ful of sapience	Except that you are so full of wisdom
That yow ne liketh, for youre heighe prudence,	That it does not please you, for your high prudence,
To weyven fro the word of Salomon.	To deviate from the word of Solomon.
This word seyde he unto us everychon:	This word said he unto us every one:
`Wirk alle thyng by conseil,' thus seyde he,	`Do everything according to good advice,' thus said he,
`And thanne shaltow nat repente thee.'	`And then shalt thou not repent.'
But though that Salomon spak swich a word,	But though Solomon spoke such a word,
Myn owene deere brother and my lord,	My own dear brother and my lord,
So wysly God my soule brynge at reste,	As surely as God my soul may bring to rest,
I holde youre owene conseil is the beste.	I hold your own counsel is the best.
For, brother myn, of me taak this motyf:	For, brother mine, of me take this advice:
I have now been a court-man al my lyf,	I have now been a courtier all my life,
And God it woot, though I unworthy be,	And God it knows, though I am unworthy,
I have stonden in ful greet degree	I have stood in very high degree
Abouten lordes of ful heigh estaat;	Among lords of very high rank;
Yet hadde I nevere with noon of hem debaat.	Yet had I never with any of them disagreement.
I nevere hem contraried, trewely;	I never contradicted them, truly;
I woot wel that my lord kan moore than I.	I know well that my lord knows more than I.
What that he seith, I holde it ferme and stable;	What he says, I consider it unshakably true;
I seye the same, or elles thyng semblable.	I say the same, or else something similar.
A ful greet fool is any conseillour	A full great fool is any counselor
That serveth any lord of heigh honour,	That serves any lord of high honor,
That dar presume, or elles thenken it,	That dares presume, or else think it,
That his conseil sholde passe his lordes wit.	That his counsel should surpass his lord's judgment.
Nay, lordes been no fooles, by my fay!	Nay, lords are no fools, by my faith!
Ye han youreselven shewed heer to-day	You have yourselves showed here to-day
So heigh sentence, so holily and weel,	Such high good judgment, so piously and well,
That I consente and conferme everydeel	That I consent and confirm every bit
Youre wordes alle and youre opinioun.	All your words and your opinion.
By God, ther nys no man in al this toun,	By God, there is no man in all this town,
Ne in Ytaille, that koude bet han sayd!	Nor in Italy, that could have spoken better!
Crist halt hym of this conseil ful wel apayd.	Christ considers himself by this counsel very well pleased.
And trewely, it is an heigh corage	And truly, it is a bold act
Of any man that stapen is in age	By any man that is advanced in age
To take a yong wyf; by my fader kyn,	To take a young wife; by my father's kin,
Youre herte hangeth on a joly pyn!	Your heart hangs on a jolly pin (is very merry)!
Dooth now in this matiere right as yow leste,	Do now in this matter exactly as you please,
For finally I holde it for the beste."	For finally I consider it for the best."
Justinus, that ay stille sat and herde,	Justinus, that always still sat and listened,
Right in this wise he to Placebo answerde:	Right in this manner he to Placebo answered:
"Now, brother myn, be pacient, I preye,	"Now, brother mine, be patient, I pray,
Syn ye han seyd, and herkneth what I seye.	Since you have spoken, and hear what I say.
Senek, amonges othere wordes wyse,	Seneca, amongst other words wise,
Seith that a man oghte hym right wel avyse	Says that a man ought very carefully consider
To whom he yeveth his lond or his catel.	To whom he gives his land or his moveable possessions.
And syn I oghte avyse me right wel	And since I ought to consider very carefully
To whom I yeve my good awey fro me,	To whom I give my goods away from me,
Wel muchel moore I oghte avysed be	Well much more I ought to consider
To whom I yeve my body for alwey.	To whom I give my body for always.
I warne yow wel, it is no childes pley	I warn you well, it is no child's play
To take a wyf withouten avysement.	To take a wife without deliberation.
Men moste enquere -- this is myn assent --	One must inquire -- this is my opinion --
Wher she be wys, or sobre, or dronkelewe,	Whether she be wise, or sober, or given to drink,
Or proud, or elles ootherweys a shrewe,	Or proud, or else otherwise a shrew,
A chidestere, or wastour of thy good,	A scold, or waster of thy goods,
Or riche, or poore, or elles mannyssh wood.	Or rich, or poor, or else man-crazy.
Al be it so that no man fynden shal	Although it is so that no man shall find
Noon in this world that trotteth hool in al,	Any in this world that is perfect in everything,
Ne man, ne beest, swich as men koude devyse;	No man, nor beast, such as men could imagine;
But nathelees it oghte ynough suffise	But nevertheless it ought enough suffice
With any wyf, if so were that she hadde	With any wife, (to learn) if it so were that she had
Mo goode thewes than hire vices badde;	More good personal qualities than her bad vices;
And al this axeth leyser for t' enquere.	And all this requires leisure to find out.
For, God it woot, I have wept many a teere	For, God it knows, I have wept many a tear
Ful pryvely, syn I have had a wyf.	Full privately, since I have had a wife.
Preyse whoso wole a wedded mannes lyf,	Praise whosoever will a wedded man's life,
Certein I fynde in it but cost and care	Certainly I find in it nothing but cost and care
And observances, of alle blisses bare.	And duties, of all blisses bare.
And yet, God woot, my neighebores aboute,	And yet, God knows, my neighbors about,
And namely of wommen many a route,	And especially many a crowd of women,
Seyn that I have the mooste stedefast wyf,	Say that I have the most steadfast wife,
And eek the mekeste oon that bereth lyf;	And also the meekest one that bears life;
But I woot best where wryngeth me my sho.	But I know best where my shoe pinches me.
Ye mowe, for me, right as yow liketh do;	You may, for me, do just as you like;
Avyseth yow -- ye been a man of age --	Consider -- you are a man of advanced age --
How that ye entren into mariage,	How that you enter into marriage,
And namely with a yong wyf and a fair.	And especially with a young wife and a fair.
By hym that made water, erthe, and air,	By him that made water, earth, and air,
The yongeste man that is in al this route	The youngest man that is in all this company
Is bisy ynough to bryngen it aboute	Is busy enough to bring it about
To han his wyf allone. Trusteth me,	To have his wife alone. Trust me,
Ye shul nat plesen hire fully yeres thre --	You shall not please her fully years three --
This is to seyn, to doon hire ful plesaunce.	This is to say, to do her full pleasure.
A wyf axeth ful many an observaunce.	A wife requires constant attention.
I prey yow that ye be nat yvele apayd."	I pray you that you be not displeased."
"Wel," quod this Januarie, "and hastow ysayd?	"Well," said this January, "and hast thou spoken?
Straw for thy Senek, and for thy proverbes!	Straw for thy Seneca, and for thy proverbs!
I counte nat a panyer ful of herbes	I would not give a bread basket full of herbs
Of scole-termes. Wyser men than thow,	For academic talk. Wiser men than thou,
As thou hast herd, assenteden right now	As thou hast heard, assented right now
To my purpos. Placebo, what sey ye?"	To my purpose. Placebo, what say you?"
"I seye it is a cursed man," quod he,	"I say it is a cursed man," said he,
"That letteth matrimoigne, sikerly."	"That hinders matrimony, certainly."
And with that word they rysen sodeynly,	And with that word they rise immediately,
And been assented fully that he sholde	And are agreed fully that he should
Be wedded whanne hym liste and where he wolde.	Be wedded when he pleased and where he would.
Heigh fantasye and curious bisynesse	Exaggerated imagination and constant thought
Fro day to day gan in the soule impresse	From day to day became fixed in the soul
Of Januarie aboute his mariage.	Of January concerning his marriage.
Many fair shap and many a fair visage	Many a fair shape and many a fair visage
Ther passeth thurgh his herte nyght by nyght,	There passes through his heart night after night,
As whoso tooke a mirour, polisshed bryght,	As if one took a mirror, polished bright,
And sette it in a commune market-place,	And set it in a common market-place,
Thanne sholde he se ful many a figure pace	Then should he see full many a figure pace
By his mirour; and in the same wyse	By his mirror; and in the same manner
Gan Januarie inwith his thoght devyse	Did January within his thought imagine
Of maydens whiche that dwelten hym bisyde.	About maidens which dwelt nearby him.
He wiste nat wher that he myghte abyde.	He knew not on which he might settle.
For if that oon have beaute in hir face,	For if that one have beauty in her face,
Another stant so in the peples grace	Another stands so in the people's good opinion
For hire sadnesse and hire benyngnytee	For her seriousness and her goodness
That of the peple grettest voys hath she;	That of the people greatest praise has she;
And somme were riche and hadden badde name.	And some were rich and had a bad reputation.
But nathelees, bitwixe ernest and game,	But nevertheless, between earnestness and joking (in every way),
He atte laste apoynted hym on oon,	He at the last decided upon one,
And leet alle othere from his herte goon,	And let all others from his heart go,
And chees hire of his owene auctoritee;	And chose her by his own authority;
For love is blynd alday, and may nat see.	For love is blind always, and can not see.
And whan that he was in his bed ybroght,	And when he was in his bed brought,
He purtreyed in his herte and in his thoght	He portrayed in his heart and in his thought
Hir fresshe beautee and hir age tendre,	Her fresh beauty and her tender age,
Hir myddel smal, hire armes longe and sklendre,	Her small waist, her arms long and slender,
Hir wise governaunce, hir gentillesse,	Her wise self-control, her nobility,
Hir wommanly berynge, and hire sadnesse.	Her womanly bearing, and her seriousness.
And whan that he on hire was condescended,	And when he on her had decided,
Hym thoughte his choys myghte nat ben amended.	He thought his choice could not be bettered.
For whan that he hymself concluded hadde,	For when he himself had decided,
Hym thoughte ech oother mannes wit so badde	He thought each other man's wit so bad
That inpossible it were to repplye	That it would be impossible to reply
Agayn his choys; this was his fantasye.	Against his choice; this was his fantasy.
His freendes sente he to, at his instaunce,	His friends sent he to, at his request,
And preyed hem to doon hym that plesaunce,	And prayed them to do him that pleasure,
That hastily they wolden to hym come;	That hastily they would come to him;
He wolde abregge hir labour, alle and some.	He would abridge their labor, one and all.
Nedeth namoore for hym to go ne ryde;	He needs no more to travel about;
He was apoynted ther he wolde abyde.	He had decided on whom he would settle.
Placebo cam, and eek his freendes soone,	Placebo came, and also his friends quickly,
And alderfirst he bad hem alle a boone,	And first of all he asked them all a favor,
That noon of hem none argumentes make	That none of them make any arguments
Agayn the purpos which that he hath take,	Against the purpose which he has taken,
Which purpos was plesant to God, seyde he,	Which purpose was pleasing to God, said he,
And verray ground of his prosperitee.	And true ground of his prosperity.
He seyde ther was a mayden in the toun,	He said there was a maiden in the town,
Which that of beautee hadde greet renoun,	Who for beauty had great renown,
Al were it so she were of smal degree;	Even though she was of low rank;
Suffiseth hym hir yowthe and hir beautee.	Her youth and her beauty are enough for him .
Which mayde, he seyde, he wolde han to his wyf,	Which maid, he said, he would have as his wife,
To lede in ese and hoolynesse his lyf;	To lead in ease and holiness his life;
And thanked God that he myghte han hire al,	And thanked God that he might have her entirely,
That no wight his blisse parten shal.	So that no one shall share his bliss.
And preyed hem to laboure in this nede,	And prayed them to labor in this need,
And shapen that he faille nat to spede;	And arrange that he fail not to succeed;
For thanne, he seyde, his spirit was at ese.	For then, he said, his spirit was at ease.
"Thanne is," quod he, "no thyng may me displese,	"Then there is," said he, "nothing that can displease me,
Save o thyng priketh in my conscience,	Save one thing sticks in my conscience,
The which I wol reherce in youre presence.	Which I will tell in your presence.
"I have," quod he, "herd seyd, ful yoore ago,	"I have," said he, "heard said, full long ago,
Ther may no man han parfite blisses two --	There can no man have perfect blisses two --
This is to seye, in erthe and eek in hevene.	This is to say, in earth and also in heaven.
For though he kepe hym fro the synnes sevene,	For though he keep him from the seven sins,
And eek from every branche of thilke tree,	And also from every branch of that same tree (of sin),
Yet is ther so parfit felicitee	Yet is there such perfect felicity
And so greet ese and lust in mariage	And such great ease and pleasure in marriage
That evere I am agast now in myn age	That ever I am frightened now in my old age
That I shal lede now so myrie a lyf,	That I shall lead now so merry a life,
So delicat, withouten wo and stryf,	So pleasing, without woe and strife,
That I shal have myn hevene in erthe heere.	That I shall have my heaven here in earth.
For sith that verray hevene is boght so deere	For since that true heaven is bought so dear
With tribulacion and greet penaunce,	With tribulation and great penance,
How sholde I thanne, that lyve in swich plesaunce	How should I then, who live in such pleasure
As alle wedded men doon with hire wyvys,	As all wedded men do with her wives,
Come to the blisse ther Crist eterne on lyve ys?	Come to the bliss where Christ eternally lives?
This is my drede, and ye, my bretheren tweye,	This is my dread, and you, my brethren two,
Assoilleth me this question, I preye."	Resolve this problem, I pray."
Justinus, which that hated his folye,	Justinus, who hated his folly,
Answerde anon right in his japerye;	Answered straight away in his mockery;
And for he wolde his longe tale abregge,	And because he would his long tale abridge,
He wolde noon auctoritee allegge,	He would cite no authority,
But seyde, "Sire, so ther be noon obstacle	But said, "Sir, providing there be no obstacle
Oother than this, God of his hygh myracle	Other than this, God by his high miracle
And of his mercy may so for yow wirche	And of his mercy may so for you work
That, er ye have youre right of hooly chirche,	That, before you have your rite of holy church (last sacrament),
Ye may repente of wedded mannes lyf,	You may repent of the wedded man's life,
In which ye seyn ther is no wo ne stryf.	In which you say there is no woe nor strife.
And elles, God forbede but he sente	And else, God forbid that he should not send
A wedded man hym grace to repente	A wedded man grace to repent himself
Wel ofte rather than a sengle man!	Well more often than a single man!
And therfore, sire -- the beste reed I kan --	And therefore, sir -- the best advice I know --
Dispeire yow noght, but have in youre memorie,	Despair you not, but have in your memory,
Paraunter she may be youre purgatorie!	Perhaps she may be your purgatory!
She may be Goddes meene and Goddes whippe;	She may be God's instrument and God's whip;
Thanne shal youre soule up to hevene skippe	Then shall your soul up to heaven skip
Swifter than dooth an arwe out of a bowe.	Swifter than does an arrow out of a bow.
I hope to God, herafter shul ye knowe	I hope to God, hereafter shall you know
That ther nys no so greet felicitee	That there is not so great felicity
In mariage, ne nevere mo shal bee,	In marriage, nor never more shall be,
That yow shal lette of youre savacion,	That shall keep you from your salvation,
So that ye use, as skile is and reson,	Providing that you use, as is proper and reasonable,
The lustes of youre wyf attemprely,	The pleasures of your wife moderately,
And that ye plese hire nat to amorously,	And that you please her not too amorously,
And that ye kepe yow eek from oother synne.	And that you keep yourself also from other sin.
My tale is doon, for my wit is thynne.	My tale is done, for my wit is thin.
Beth nat agast herof, my brother deere,	Be not afraid of this, my brother dear,
But lat us waden out of this mateere.	But let us wade out of this matter.
The Wyf of Bathe, if ye han understonde,	The Wife of Bath, if you have understood her,
Of mariage, which we have on honde,	Of marriage, which we have in hand,
Declared hath ful wel in litel space.	Declared has full well in little space.
Fareth now wel. God have yow in his grace."	Now farewell. God have you in his grace."
And with this word this Justyn and his brother	And with this word this Justin and his brother
Han take hir leve, and ech of hem of oother.	Have taken their leave, and each of them of other.
For whan they saughe that it moste nedes be,	For when they saw that it must necessarily be,
They wroghten so, by sly and wys tretee,	They worked so, by sly and wise negotiation,
That she, this mayden which that Mayus highte,	That she, this maiden who May was called,
As hastily as evere that she myghte	As hastily as ever that she might
Shal wedded be unto this Januarie.	Shall wedded be unto this January.
I trowe it were to longe yow to tarie,	I believe it would be too long to delay you,
If I yow tolde of every scrit and bond	If I told you of every legal document and bond
By which that she was feffed in his lond,	By which she was endowed with his land,
Or for to herknen of hir riche array.	Or to hear of her rich array.
But finally ycomen is the day	But finally the day is come
That to the chirche bothe be they went	That to the church both are they went
For to receyve the hooly sacrement.	To receive the holy sacrament (of marriage).
Forth comth the preest, with stole aboute his nekke,	Forth comes the priest, with stole about his neck,
And bad hire be lyk Sarra and Rebekke	And commanded her to be like Sarah and Rebecca
In wysdom and in trouthe of mariage;	In wisdom and in faithfulness of marriage;
And seyde his orisons, as is usage,	And said his prayers, as is the usage,
And croucheth hem, and bad God sholde hem blesse,	And makes the sign of the cross over them, and prayed God should them bless,
And made al siker ynogh with hoolynesse.	And made all secure enough with holiness.
Thus been they wedded with solempnitee,	Thus are they wedded with solemnity,
And at the feeste sitteth he and she	And at the feast sits he and she
With othere worthy folk upon the deys.	With other worthy folk upon the dais.
Al ful of joye and blisse is the paleys,	All full of joy and bliss is the palace,
And ful of instrumentz and of vitaille,	And full of instruments and of foods,
The mooste deyntevous of al Ytaille.	The most delicious of all Italy.
Biforn hem stoode instrumentz of swich soun	Before them stood instruments of such sound
That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphioun,	That Orpheus, nor Amphioun of Thebes,
Ne maden nevere swich a melodye.	Made never such a melody.
At every cours thanne cam loud mynstralcye	At every course then came loud minstrelsy
That nevere tromped Joab for to heere,	That never trumpeted Joab to be heard,
Nor he Theodomas, yet half so cleere	Nor that Theodomas, yet half so clear
At Thebes whan the citee was in doute.	At Thebes when the city was in danger.
Bacus the wyn hem shynketh al aboute,	Bacchus pours them the wine all around,
And Venus laugheth upon every wight,	And Venus laughs upon every person,
For Januarie was bicome hir knyght	For January had become her knight
And wolde bothe assayen his corage	And would test his spirit both
In libertee, and eek in mariage;	In liberty, and also in marriage;
And with hire fyrbrond in hire hand aboute	And with her torch in her hand about
Daunceth biforn the bryde and al the route.	Dances before the bride and all the company.
And certeinly, I dar right wel seyn this,	And certainly, I dare right well say this,
Ymeneus, that god of weddyng is,	Hymen, that god of wedding is,
Saugh nevere his lyf so myrie a wedded man.	Saw never in his life so merry a wedded man.
Hoold thou thy pees, thou poete Marcian,	Hold thou thy peace, thou poet Martianus Capella,
That writest us that ilke weddyng murie	Who writes for us that same wedding merry
Of hire Philologie and hym Mercurie,	Of her, Philology, and him, Mercury,
And of the songes that the Muses songe!	And of the songs that the Muses sang!
To smal is bothe thy penne, and eek thy tonge,	Too small is both thy pen, and also thy tongue,
For to descryven of this mariage.	To describe this marriage.
Whan tendre youthe hath wedded stoupyng age,	When tender youth has wedded stooping age,
Ther is swich myrthe that it may nat be writen.	There is such mirth that it can not be written.
Assayeth it youreself; thanne may ye witen	Try it yourself; then can you know
If that I lye or noon in this matiere.	If I lie or not in this matter.
Mayus, that sit with so benyngne a chiere,	May, that sits with so benign a manner,
Hire to biholde it semed fayerye.	Her to behold it seemed an enchantment.
Queene Ester looked nevere with swich an ye	Queen Esther looked never with such an eye
On Assuer, so meke a look hath she.	On Ahasuerus, so meek a look has she.
I may yow nat devyse al hir beautee.	I can not describe to you all her beauty.
But thus muche of hire beautee telle I may,	But thus much of her beauty tell I can,
That she was lyk the brighte morwe of May,	That she was like the bright morning of May,
Fulfild of alle beautee and plesaunce.	Filled with all beauty and delight.
This Januarie is ravysshed in a traunce	This January is ravished in a trance
At every tyme he looked on hir face;	At every time he looked on her face;
But in his herte he gan hire to manace	But in his heart he began to menace her
That he that nyght in armes wolde hire streyne	That he that night in arms would her strain
Harder than evere Parys dide Eleyne.	Harder than ever Paris did Helen of Troy.
But nathelees yet hadde he greet pitee	But nevertheless yet had he great pity
That thilke nyght offenden hire moste he,	That that same night he must offend her,
And thoughte, "Allas! O tendre creature,	And thought, "Alas! O tender creature,
Now wolde God ye myghte wel endure	Now would God you might well endure
Al my corage, it is so sharp and keene!	All my desire, it is so sharp and keen!
I am agast ye shul it nat susteene.	I am afraid you shall not be able to endure it.
But God forbede that I dide al my myght!	But God forbid that I did all my might!
Now wolde God that it were woxen nyght,	Now would God that it were become night,
And that the nyght wolde lasten everemo.	And that the night would last evermore.
I wolde that al this peple were ago."	I would that all this people were gone."
And finally he dooth al his labour,	And finally he takes all possible pains,
As he best myghte, savynge his honour,	As he best could, so far as good manners allowed,
To haste hem fro the mete in subtil wyse.	To hasten them from the dinner in subtle manner.
The tyme cam that resoun was to ryse;	The time came that it was reasonable to rise;
And after that men daunce and drynken faste,	And after that men dance and drink deeply,
And spices al aboute the hous they caste,	And spiced cakes all about the house they passed,
And ful of joye and blisse is every man --	And full of joy and bliss is every man --
Al but a squyer, highte Damyan,	All but a squire, called Damian,
Which carf biforn the knyght ful many a day.	Who carved before the knight full many a day.
He was so ravysshed on his lady May	He was so ravished on his lady May
That for the verray peyne he was ny wood.	That for the very pain he was nearly crazy.
Almoost he swelte and swowned ther he stood,	Almost he fainted and swooned where he stood,
So soore hath Venus hurt hym with hire brond,	So sorely has Venus hurt him with her torch,
As that she bar it daunsynge in hire hond;	As she carried it dancing in her hand;
And to his bed he wente hym hastily.	And to his bed he went hastily.
Namoore of hym at this tyme speke I,	No more of him at this time speak I,
But there I lete hym wepe ynogh and pleyne	But there I let him weep enough and complain
Til fresshe May wol rewen on his peyne.	Until fresh May will rue on his pain.
O perilous fyr, that in the bedstraw bredeth!	O perilous fire, that in the bedstraw breeds!
O famulier foo, that his servyce bedeth!	O enemy in one's household, that offers his service!
O servant traytour, false hoomly hewe,	O servant traitor, false domestic servant,
Lyk to the naddre in bosom sly untrewe,	Like to the sly untrue adder in one's bosom,
God shilde us alle from youre aqueyntaunce!	God protect us all from your acquaintance!
O Januarie, dronken in plesaunce	O January, drunk with pleasure
In mariage, se how thy Damyan,	In marriage, see how thy Damian,
Thyn owene squier and thy borne man,	Thine own squire and thy servant from birth,
Entendeth for to do thee vileynye.	Intends to do thee villainy.
God graunte thee thyn hoomly fo t' espye!	God grant thee thy foe in thy household to espy!
For in this world nys worse pestilence	For in this world is no worse pestilence
Than hoomly foo al day in thy presence.	Than a foe in thy household always in thy presence.
Parfourned hath the sonne his ark diurne;	The sun has completed his daily journey;
No lenger may the body of hym sojurne	No longer can its body sojourn
On th' orisonte, as in that latitude.	On the horizon, in that latitude.
Night with his mantel, that is derk and rude,	Night with its mantle, that is dark and rude,
Gan oversprede the hemysperie aboute;	Did overspread the hemisphere about;
For which departed is this lusty route	For which departed is this cheerful crowd
Fro Januarie, with thank on every syde.	From January, with thanks on all sides.
Hoom to hir houses lustily they ryde,	Home to their houses cheerfully they ride,
Where as they doon hir thynges as hem leste,	Where they attend to their affairs as they pleased
And whan they sye hir tyme, goon to reste.	And when they see their time, go to rest.
Soone after that, this hastif Januarie	Soon after that, this hasty January
Wolde go to bedde; he wolde no lenger tarye.	Would go to bed; he would no longer tarry.
He drynketh ypocras, clarree, and vernage	He drinks mulled wine, claret, and strong white wine
Of spices hoote t' encreessen his corage;	With hot spices to increase his desire;
And many a letuarie hath he ful fyn,	And many a very fine aphrodisiac has he,
Swiche as the cursed monk, daun Constantyn,	Such as the cursed monk, Dan Constantine,
Hath writen in his book De Coitu;	Has written in his book "Concerning Intercourse";
To eten hem alle he nas no thyng eschu.	To eat them all he was not at all averse.
And to his privee freendes thus seyde he:	And to his private friends thus said he:
"For Goddes love, as soone as it may be,	"For God's love, as soon as it can be done,
Lat voyden al this hous in curteys wyse."	Have all this house emptied in courteous manner."
And they han doon right as he wol devyse.	And they have done right as he will command.
Men drynken and the travers drawe anon.	Men drink and draw the curtain (dividing the room) straightway.
The bryde was broght abedde as stille as stoon;	The bride was brought to bed as still as stone;
And whan the bed was with the preest yblessed,	And when the bed was by the priest blessed,
Out of the chambre hath every wight hym dressed,	Out of the chamber has every one gone,
And Januarie hath faste in armes take	And January has fast in arms taken
His fresshe May, his paradys, his make.	His fresh May, his paradise, his mate.
He lulleth hire; he kisseth hire ful ofte;	He lulls her; he kisses her full often;
With thikke brustles of his berd unsofte,	With thick bristles of his beard rough,
Lyk to the skyn of houndfyssh, sharp as brere --	Like to the skin of a shark, sharp as brier --
For he was shave al newe in his manere --	For he was all freshly shaved in his fashion --
He rubbeth hire aboute hir tendre face,	He rubs her about her tender face,
And seyde thus, "Allas! I moot trespace	And said thus, "Alas! I must do injury
To yow, my spouse, and yow greetly offende	To you, my spouse, and you greatly offend
Er tyme come that I wil doun descende.	Before the time comes that I will down descend.
But nathelees, considereth this," quod he,	But nevertheless, consider this," said he,
"Ther nys no werkman, whatsoevere he be,	"There is no workman, whosoever he be,
That may bothe werke wel and hastily;	That can work both well and hastily;
This wol be doon at leyser parfitly.	This will be done at leisure perfectly.
It is no fors how longe that we pleye;	It does not matter how long we play;
In trewe wedlok coupled be we tweye,	In true wedlock we two are coupled,
And blessed be the yok that we been inne,	And blessed be the yoke that we are in,
For in oure actes we mowe do no synne.	For in our acts we can do no sin.
A man may do no synne with his wyf,	A man can do no sin with his wife,
Ne hurte hymselven with his owene knyf,	Nor hurt himself with his own knife,
For we han leve to pleye us by the lawe."	For we have leave by the law to enjoy ourselves."
Thus laboureth he til that the day gan dawe;	Thus labors he until the day dawned;
And thanne he taketh a sop in fyn clarree,	And then he takes a bit of bread soaked in fine claret,
And upright in his bed thanne sitteth he,	And upright in his bed then sits he,
And after that he sang ful loude and cleere,	And after that he sang full loud and clear,
And kiste his wyf, and made wantown cheere.	And kissed his wife, and acted lecherously.
He was al coltissh, ful of ragerye,	He was frisky as a colt, full of wantonness,
And ful of jargon as a flekked pye.	And full of chatter as a spotted magpie.
The slakke skyn aboute his nekke shaketh	The slack skin about his neck shakes
Whil that he sang, so chaunteth he and craketh.	While he sang, so chants he and croaks.
But God woot what that May thoughte in hir herte,	But God knows what May thought in her heart,
Whan she hym saugh up sittynge in his sherte,	When she saw him sitting up in his shirt,
In his nyght-cappe, and with his nekke lene;	In his night-cap, and with his lean neck;
She preyseth nat his pleyyng worth a bene.	She rates his playing not worth a bean.
Thanne seide he thus, "My reste wol I take;	Then said he thus, "My rest will I take;
Now day is come, I may no lenger wake."	Now day is come, I can no longer remain awake."
And doun he leyde his heed and sleep til pryme.	And down he laid his head and slept until nine.
And afterward, whan that he saugh his tyme,	And afterwards, when he saw his time,
Up ryseth Januarie; but fresshe May	Up rises January; but fresh May
Heeld hire chambre unto the fourthe day,	Held her chamber until the fourth day,
As usage is of wyves for the beste.	As is the best usage of wives.
For every labour somtyme moot han reste,	For every labor sometime must have rest,
Or elles longe may he nat endure;	Or else long can he not endure;
This is to seyn, no lyves creature,	This is to say, no living creature,
Be it of fyssh, or bryd, or beest, or man.	Be it of fish, or bird, or beast, or man.
Now wol I speke of woful Damyan,	Now will I speak of woeful Damian,
That langwissheth for love, as ye shul heere;	That languishes for love, as you shall hear;
Therfore I speke to hym in this manere:	Therefore I speak to him in this manner:
I seye, "O sely Damyan, allas!	I say, "O innocent Damian, alas!
Andswere to my demaunde, as in this cas.	Answer to my question, in this case.
How shaltow to thy lady, fresshe May,	How shalt thou to thy lady, fresh May,
Telle thy wo? She wole alwey seye nay.	Tell thy woe? She will always say nay.
Eek if thou speke, she wol thy wo biwreye.	Also if thou speak, she will thy woe reveal.
God be thyn helpe! I kan no bettre seye."	God be thy help! I can no better say."
This sike Damyan in Venus fyr	This sick Damian in Venus' fire
So brenneth that he dyeth for desyr,	So burns that he dies for desire,
For which he putte his lyf in aventure.	For which he put his life at risk.
No lenger myghte he in this wise endure,	No longer could he in this way endure,
But prively a penner gan he borwe,	But secretly a writing set he borrowed,
And in a lettre wroot he al his sorwe,	And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,
In manere of a compleynt or a lay,	In the manner of a poetic lament or a song,
Unto his faire, fresshe lady May;	Unto his fair, fresh lady May;
And in a purs of sylk heng on his sherte	And in a purse of silk which hung on his shirt
He hath it put, and leyde it at his herte.	He has put it, and laid it at his heart.
The moone, that at noon was thilke day	The moon, that was at noon that same day
That Januarie hath wedded fresshe May	That January has wedded fresh May
In two of Tawr, was into Cancre glyden;	In two degrees of Taurus, was into Cancer glided;
So longe hath Mayus in hir chambre abyden,	So long has May in her chamber abided,
As custume is unto thise nobles alle.	As custom is unto these nobles all.
A bryde shal nat eten in the halle	A bride shall not eat in the hall
Til dayes foure, or thre dayes atte leeste,	Until four days, or three days at the least,
Ypassed been; thanne lat hire go to feeste.	Are passed; then let her go to feast.
The fourthe day compleet fro noon to noon,	The fourth day completed from noon to noon,
Whan that the heighe masse was ydoon,	When the high mass was done,
In halle sit this Januarie and May,	In hall this January and May sit,
As fressh as is the brighte someres day.	As fresh as is the bright summer's day.
And so bifel how that this goode man	And so befell that this good man
Remembred hym upon this Damyan,	Remembered this Damian,
And seyde, "Seynte Marie! how may this be,	And said, "Saint Mary! how can this be,
That Damyan entendeth nat to me?	That Damian does not attend on me?
Is he ay syk, or how may this bityde?"	Is he always sick, or how can this happen?"
His squieres, whiche that stooden ther bisyde,	His squires, who stood there beside,
Excused hym by cause of his siknesse,	Excused him because of his sickness,
Which letted hym to doon his bisynesse;	Which prevented him from doing his duties;
Noon oother cause myghte make hym tarye.	No other cause might make him tarry.
"That me forthynketh," quod this Januarie,	"I am sorry about that," said this January,
"He is a gentil squier, by my trouthe!	"He is a gentle squire, by my troth!
If that he deyde, it were harm and routhe.	If he died, it would be a harm and a pity.
He is as wys, discreet, and as secree	He is as wise, discreet, and as circumspect
As any man I woot of his degree,	As any man I know of his rank,
And therto manly, and eek servysable,	And moreover manly, and also willing to serve,
And for to been a thrifty man right able.	And to be a worthy man right able.
But after mete, as soone as evere I may,	But after dinner, as soon as ever I can,
I wol myself visite hym, and eek May,	I will myself visit him, and also May,
To doon hym al the confort that I kan."	To do him all the comfort that I can."
And for that word hym blessed every man,	And for that word every man blessed him,
That of his bountee and his gentillesse	That of his goodness and his graciousness
He wolde so conforten in siknesse	He would so comfort in sickness
His squier, for it was a gentil dede.	His squire, for it was a gentle deed.
"Dame," quod this Januarie, "taak good hede,	"My Lady," said this January, "take good heed,
At after-mete ye with youre wommen alle,	At after-dinner you with all your women,
Whan ye han been in chambre out of this halle,	When you have been in chamber out of this hall,
That alle ye go se this Damyan.	That all you go see this Damian.
Dooth hym disport -- he is a gentil man;	Cheer him up -- he is a gentle man;
And telleth hym that I wol hym visite,	And tell him that I will him visit,
Have I no thyng but rested me a lite;	When I have done nothing but rested myself a little;
And spede yow faste, for I wole abyde	And hurry yourself, for I will wait
Til that ye slepe faste by my syde."	Until you sleep fast by my side."
And with that word he gan to hym to calle	And with that word he began to him to call
A squier, that was marchal of his halle,	A squire, that was master of ceremonies of his hall,
And tolde hym certeyn thynges, what he wolde.	And told him certain things, what he wanted.
This fresshe May hath streight hir wey yholde	This fresh May has held straight her way
With alle hir wommen unto Damyan.	With all her women unto Damian.
Doun by his beddes syde sit she than,	Down by his bed's side sits she then,
Confortynge hym as goodly as she may.	Comforting him as graciously as she can.
This Damyan, whan that his tyme he say,	This Damian, when he saw his opportunity,
In secree wise his purs and eek his bille,	In a secret way his purse and also his letter,
In which that he ywriten hadde his wille,	In which he had written his desire,
Hath put into hire hand, withouten moore,	Has put into her hand, without (doing) more,
Save that he siketh wonder depe and soore,	Save that he sighs wonderfully deep and sore,
And softely to hire right thus seyde he:	And softly to her right thus said he:
"Mercy! And that ye nat discovere me,	"Mercy! And (I ask) that you not discover me,
For I am deed if that this thyng be kyd."	For I am dead if this thing be known."
This purs hath she inwith hir bosom hyd	This purse has she within her bosom hidden
And wente hire wey; ye gete namoore of me.	And went her way; you get no more from me.
But unto Januarie ycomen is she,	But unto January come is she,
That on his beddes syde sit ful softe.	Who on his bed's side sits full softly.
He taketh hire, and kisseth hire ful ofte,	He takes her, and kisses her full often,
And leyde hym doun to slepe, and that anon.	And laid him down to sleep, and that straightway.
She feyned hire as that she moste gon	She pretended that she must go
Ther as ye woot that every wight moot neede;	Where you know that every person must go by necessity;
And whan she of this bille hath taken heede,	And when she of this letter has taken heed,
She rente it al to cloutes atte laste,	She tore it all to pieces at the last,
And in the pryvee softely it caste.	And in the privy softly threw it.
Who studieth now but faire fresshe May?	Who is perplexed now but fair fresh May?
Adoun by olde Januarie she lay,	Down by old January she lay,
That sleep til that the coughe hath hym awaked.	Who slept until the cough has him awaked.
Anon he preyde hire strepen hire al naked;	Straightway he prayed her to strip herself all naked;
He wolde of hire, he seyde, han som plesaunce;	He would of her, he said, have some pleasure;
He seyde hir clothes dide hym encombraunce,	He said her clothes got in his way,
And she obeyeth, be hire lief or looth.	And she obeys, whether she wants to or not.
But lest that precious folk be with me wrooth,	But lest that prudish folk be with me wroth,
How that he wroghte, I dar nat to yow telle,	How he worked, I dare not tell to you,
Or wheither hire thoughte it paradys or helle.	Or whether she thought it paradise or hell.
But heere I lete hem werken in hir wyse	But here I let them work in their way
Til evensong rong and that they moste aryse.	Until bell for evening prayers rang and they had to arise.
Were it by destynee or by aventure,	Were it by destiny or by chance,
Were it by influence or by nature,	Were it by astronomical influence or by nature,
Or constellacion, that in swich estaat	Or configuration of the stars, that in such a state
The hevene stood that tyme fortunaat	The heaven stood that time that it fortunate
Was for to putte a bille of Venus werkes --	Was to present a petition concerning Venus' works --
For alle thyng hath tyme, as seyn thise clerkes --	For every thing has time, as say these clerks --
To any womman for to gete hire love,	To any woman to get her love,
I kan nat seye; but grete God above,	I can not say; but great God above,
That knoweth that noon act is causelees,	That knows that no act is without cause,
He deme of al, for I wole holde my pees.	May he judge of all, for I will hold my peace.
But sooth is this, how that this fresshe May	But truth is this, how this fresh May
Hath take swich impression that day	Has taken such impression that day
Of pitee of this sike Damyan	Of pity for this sick Damian
That from hire herte she ne dryve kan	That from her heart she can not drive
The remembrance for to doon hym ese.	The thought to comfort him.
"Certeyn," thoghte she, "whom that this thyng displese	"Certainly," thought she, "whomever this thing may displease
I rekke noght, for heere I hym assure	I care not, for here I him assure
To love hym best of any creature,	To love him best of any creature,
Though he namoore hadde than his sherte."	Though he had no more than his shirt."
Lo, pitee renneth soone in gentil herte!	Lo, pity runs soon in gentle heart!
Heere may ye se how excellent franchise	Here can you see what excellent generosity
In wommen is, whan they hem narwe avyse.	In women is, when they carefully deliberate a matter.
Som tyrant is, as ther be many oon	Some tyrant is, as there be many a one
That hath an herte as hard as any stoon,	Who has a heart as hard as any stone,
Which wolde han lat hym sterven in the place	Who would have let him die in the place
Wel rather than han graunted hym hire grace,	Well rather than have granted him her grace,
And hem rejoysen in hire crueel pryde,	And rejoice in her cruel pride,
And rekke nat to been an homycide.	And care not to be a homicide.
This gentil May, fulfilled of pitee,	This gentle May, filled full of pity,
Right of hire hand a lettre made she,	In her own hand a letter made she,
In which she graunteth hym hire verray grace.	In which she grants him her true grace.
Ther lakketh noght oonly but day and place	There lacks nothing but only day and place
Wher that she myghte unto his lust suffise,	Where she might satisfy his desires,
For it shal be right as he wole devyse.	For it shall be right as he will devise.
And whan she saugh hir tyme, upon a day	And when she saw her time, upon one day
To visite this Damyan gooth May,	To visit this Damian goes May,
And sotilly this lettre doun she threste	And craftily this letter down she thrust
Under his pilwe; rede it if hym leste.	Under his pillow; let him read it if he wishes.
She taketh hym by the hand and harde hym twiste	She takes him by the hand and hard him squeezes
So secrely that no wight of it wiste,	So secretly that no one knew of it,
And bad hym been al hool, and forth she wente	And bade him be all healthy, and forth she went
To Januarie, whan that he for hire sente.	To January, when he for her sent.
Up riseth Damyan the nexte morwe;	Up rises Damian the next morning;
Al passed was his siknesse and his sorwe.	All passed was his sickness and his sorrow.
He kembeth hym, he preyneth hym and pyketh,	He combs himself, he preens and neatens himself,
He dooth al that his lady lust and lyketh,	He does all that his lady desires and pleases,
And eek to Januarie he gooth as lowe	And also to January he goes as humbly
As evere dide a dogge for the bowe.	As ever did a dog trained to hunt with an archer.
He is so plesant unto every man	He is so pleasant unto every man
(For craft is al, whoso that do it kan)	(For craft is all, whoever can do it)
That every wight is fayn to speke hym good,	That every one is eager to speak good of him,
And fully in his lady grace he stood.	And fully in his lady's favor he stood.
Thus lete I Damyan aboute his nede,	Thus leave I Damian going about his business,
And in my tale forth I wol procede.	And in my tale forth I will proceed.
Somme clerkes holden that felicitee	Some clerks maintain that felicity
Stant in delit, and therfore certeyn he,	Consists of delight, and therefore certainly he,
This noble Januarie, with al his myght,	This noble January, with all his might,
In honest wyse, as longeth to a knyght,	In a respectable manner, as is suitable to a knight,
Shoop hym to lyve ful deliciously.	Arranged for himself to live full voluptuously.
His housynge, his array, as honestly	His lodging, his clothing, as suitably
To his degree was maked as a kynges.	To his degree was made as is a king's.
Amonges othere of his honeste thynges,	Amongst others of his suitable things,
He made a gardyn, walled al with stoon;	He made a garden, walled all with stone;
So fair a gardyn woot I nowher noon.	So fair a garden know I anywhere none.
For, out of doute, I verraily suppose	For, beyond doubt, I truly suppose
That he that wroot the Romance of the Rose	That he who wrote the Romance of the Rose
Ne koude of it the beautee wel devyse;	Could not the beauty of it well describe;
Ne Priapus ne myghte nat suffise,	Nor Priapus could not be adequate,
Though he be god of gardyns, for to telle	Though he be god of gardens, to tell
The beautee of the gardyn and the welle	The beauty of the garden and the well
That stood under a laurer alwey grene.	That stood under a laurel always green.
Ful ofte tyme he Pluto and his queene,	Very often he, Pluto, and his queen,
Proserpina, and al hire fayerye,	Proserpine, and all their fairies,
Disporten hem and maken melodye	Amused themselves and made melody
Aboute that welle, and daunced, as men tolde.	About that well, and danced, as men told.
This noble knyght, this Januarie the olde,	This noble knight, this January the old,
Swich deyntee hath in it to walke and pleye,	Such pleasure has in it to walk and play,
That he wol no wight suffren bere the keye	That he will no one allow to bear the key
Save he hymself; for of the smale wyket	Save he himself; for of the small gate
He baar alwey of silver a clyket,	He bore always of silver a latchkey,
With which, whan that hym leste, he it unshette.	With which, when he desired, he unlocked it.
And whan he wolde paye his wyf hir dette	And when he would pay his wife her marital debt
In somer seson, thider wolde he go,	In summer season, thither would he go,
And May his wyf, and no wight but they two;	And May his wife, and no one but those two;
And thynges whiche that were nat doon abedde,	And things which that were not done abed,
He in the gardyn parfourned hem and spedde.	He in the garden performed and accomplished them.
And in this wyse, many a murye day,	And in this way, many a merry day,
Lyved this Januarie and fresshe May.	Lived this January and fresh May.
But worldly joye may nat alwey dure	But worldly joy can not always endure
To Januarie, ne to no creature.	To January, nor to any creature.
O sodeyn hap! O thou Fortune unstable!	O sudden chance! O thou Fortune unstable!
Lyk to the scorpion so deceyvable,	Similar to the scorpion so deceitful,
That flaterest with thyn heed whan thou wolt stynge;	That flatter with thy head when thou wilt sting;
Thy tayl is deeth, thurgh thyn envenymynge.	Thy tail is death, through thy poisoning.
O brotil joye! O sweete venym queynte!	O brittle joy! O sweet venom deceitful!
O monstre, that so subtilly kanst peynte	O monster, that so subtly can disguise
Thy yiftes under hewe of stidefastnesse,	Thy gifts under appearance of steadfastness,
That thou deceyvest bothe moore and lesse!	That thou deceivest both high and low (everyone)!
Why hastow Januarie thus deceyved,	Why hast thou January thus deceived,
That haddest hym for thy fulle freend receyved?	Thou who had received him for thy closest friend ?
And now thou hast biraft hym bothe his yen,	And now thou hast deprived him of both his eyes,
For sorwe of which desireth he to dyen.	For sorrow of which he desires to die.
Allas, this noble Januarie free,	Alas, this noble generous January,
Amydde his lust and his prosperitee,	Amid his pleasure and his prosperity,
Is woxen blynd, and that al sodeynly.	Is grown blind, and that all suddenly.
He wepeth and he wayleth pitously;	He weeps and he wails pitifully;
And therwithal the fyr of jalousie,	And with all this the fire of jealousy,
Lest that his wyf sholde falle in som folye,	Lest that his wife should fall in some folly,
So brente his herte that he wolde fayn	So burned his heart that he sincerely wished
That som man bothe hire and hym had slayn.	That some man both her and him had slain.
For neither after his deeth nor in his lyf	For neither after his death nor in his life
Ne wolde he that she were love ne wyf,	Would he that she were neither lover nor wife,
But evere lyve as wydwe in clothes blake,	But ever live as widow in clothes black,
Soul as the turtle that lost hath hire make.	Solitary as the turtledove that lost has her mate.
But atte laste, after a month or tweye,	But at the last, after a month or two,
His sorwe gan aswage, sooth to seye;	His sorrow abated, truth to say;
For whan he wiste it may noon oother be,	For when he knew it can not be otherwise,
He paciently took his adversitee,	He patiently accepted his adversity,
Save, out of doute, he may nat forgoon	Except that, no doubt, he can not refrain
That he nas jalous everemoore in oon;	From being more jealous all the time;
Which jalousye it was so outrageous	Which jealousy was so excessive
That neither in halle, n' yn noon oother hous,	That neither in hall, nor in any other house,
Ne in noon oother place, neverthemo,	Nor in any other place, no longer,
He nolde suffre hire for to ryde or go,	He would suffer her to ride or walk,
But if that he had hond on hire alway;	Unless he had a hand always on her;
For which ful ofte wepeth fresshe May,	For which full often weeps fresh May,
That loveth Damyan so benyngnely	Who loves Damian so graciously
That she moot outher dyen sodeynly	That she must either die suddenly
Or elles she moot han hym as hir leste.	Or else she must have him as she wishes.
She wayteth whan hir herte wolde breste.	She expects that her heart would burst.
Upon that oother syde Damyan	Upon that other side Damian
Bicomen is the sorwefulleste man	Is become the most sorrowful man
That evere was, for neither nyght ne day	That ever was, for neither night nor day
Ne myghte he speke a word to fresshe May,	Could he speak one word to fresh May,
As to his purpos, of no swich mateere,	Regarding his purpose, of any such matter,
But if that Januarie moste it heere,	Without January's hearing it,
That hadde an hand upon hire everemo.	Who had a hand upon her always.
But nathelees, by writyng to and fro	But nevertheless, by writing to and fro
And privee signes wiste he what she mente,	And secret signs he knew what she meant,
And she knew eek the fyn of his entente.	And she knew also the aim of his plan.
O Januarie, what myghte it thee availle,	O January, what might it thee avail,
Thogh thou myghtest se as fer as shippes saille?	Though thou could see as far as ships sail?
For as good is blynd deceyved be	For it is as good to be deceived when blind
As to be deceyved whan a man may se.	As to be deceived when a man can see.
Lo, Argus, which that hadde an hondred yen,	Lo, Argus, who had a hundred eyes,
For al that evere he koude poure or pryen,	For all that ever he could peer or pry,
Yet was he blent, and, God woot, so been mo	Yet was he deceived, and, God knows, so are others
That wenen wisly that it be nat so.	That confidently suppose indeed that it is not so.
Passe over is an ese, I sey namoore.	To overlook (trouble) is an advantage, I say no more.
This fresshe May, that I spak of so yoore,	This fresh May, whom I spoke of formerly,
In warm wex hath emprented the clyket	In warm wax has made an impression of the latchkey
That Januarie bar of the smale wyket,	That January carried of the small gate,
By which into his gardyn ofte he wente;	By which into his garden often he went;
And Damyan, that knew al hire entente,	And Damian, who knew all her plan,
The cliket countrefeted pryvely.	The latchkey counterfeited secretly.
Ther nys namoore to seye, but hastily	There is no more to say, but hastily
Som wonder by this clyket shal bityde,	Some wonder by this latchkey shall betide,
Which ye shul heeren, if ye wole abyde.	Which you shall hear, if you will abide.
O noble Ovyde, ful sooth seystou, God woot,	O noble Ovid, full truth sayest thou, God knows,
What sleighte is it, thogh it be long and hoot,	What trick is it, though (finding) it be long and painful,
That Love nyl fynde it out in som manere?	That Love will not find it out in some manner?
By Piramus and Tesbee may men leere;	By Pyramus and Thisbe can one learn;
Thogh they were kept ful longe streite overal,	Though they were kept full long strictly in every way,
They been accorded, rownynge thurgh a wal,	They are agreed, whispering through a wall,
Ther no wight koude han founde out swich a sleighte.	Where no one could have found such a trick.
But now to purpos: er that dayes eighte	But now to purpose: before eight days
Were passed [of] the month of [Juyn], bifil	Were passed [of] the month of [June], it happened
That Januarie hath caught so greet a wil,	That January has caught so great a desire,
Thurgh eggyng of his wyf, hym for to pleye	Through incitement of his wife, to enjoy himself
In his gardyn, and no wight but they tweye,	In his garden, and no one (there) but those two,
That in a morwe unto his May seith he:	That in a morning unto his May says he:
"Rys up, my wyf, my love, my lady free!	"Rise up, my wife, my love, my noble lady!
The turtles voys is herd, my dowve sweete;	The turtle dove's voice is heard, my dove sweet;
The wynter is goon with alle his reynes weete.	The winter is gone with all his rains wet.
Com forth now, with thyne eyen columbyn!	Come forth now, with thy dove-like eyes!
How fairer been thy brestes than is wyn!	How fairer are thy breasts than is wine!
The gardyn is enclosed al aboute;	The garden is enclosed all about;
Com forth, my white spouse! Out of doute	Come forth, my white spouse! Beyond doubt
Thou hast me wounded in myn herte, O wyf!	Thou hast me wounded in my heart, O wife!
No spot of thee ne knew I al my lyf.	No blemish on thee knew I all my life.
Com forth, and lat us taken oure disport;	Come forth, and let us take our pleasure;
I chees thee for my wyf and my confort."	I chose thee for my wife and my comfort."
Swiche olde lewed wordes used he.	Such old ignorant words used he.
On Damyan a signe made she,	To Damian a sign made she,
That he sholde go biforn with his cliket.	That he should go before with his latchkey.
This Damyan thanne hath opened the wyket,	This Damian then has opened the gate,
And in he stirte, and that in swich manere	And in he hurried, and that in such a way
That no wight myghte it se neither yheere,	That no one could either see or hear it,
And stille he sit under a bussh anon.	And quickly he sits still under a bush.
This Januarie, as blynd as is a stoon,	This January, as blind as is a stone,
With Mayus in his hand, and no wight mo,	With May in his hand, and no one else,
Into his fresshe gardyn is ago,	Into his fresh garden has gone,
And clapte to the wyket sodeynly.	And closed the gate quickly.
"Now wyf," quod he, "heere nys but thou and I,	"Now wife," said he, "here is no one but thou and I,
That art the creature that I best love.	That art the creature that I best love.
For by that Lord that sit in hevene above,	For by that Lord that sits in heaven above,
Levere ich hadde to dyen on a knyf	I had rather die on a knife
Than thee offende, trewe deere wyf!	Than thee offend, true dear wife!
For Goddes sake, thenk how I thee chees,	For God's sake, think how I thee chose,
Noght for no coveitise, doutelees,	Not for any greed, doubtless,
But oonly for the love I had to thee.	But only for the love I had to thee.
And though that I be oold and may nat see,	And although I be old and can not see,
Beth to me trewe, and I wol telle yow why.	Be to me true, and I will tell you why.
Thre thynges, certes, shal ye wynne therby:	Three things, certainly, shall you win thereby:
First, love of Crist, and to youreself honour,	First, love of Christ, and to yourself honor,
And al myn heritage, toun and tour;	And all my heritage, town and tower;
I yeve it yow, maketh chartres as yow leste;	I give it to you, draw up deeds as you please;
This shal be doon to-morwe er sonne reste,	This shall be done to-morrow before sun goes to rest,
So wisly God my soule brynge in blisse.	As God my soul may bring in bliss.
I prey yow first, in covenant ye me kisse;	I pray you first, to seal the contract, you kiss me;
And though that I be jalous, wyte me noght.	And though that I be jealous, blame me not.
Ye been so depe enprented in my thoght	You are so deeply imprinted in my thought
That, whan that I considere youre beautee	That, when I consider your beauty
And therwithal the unlikly elde of me,	And in addition to that the unsuitable old age of me,
I may nat, certes, though I sholde dye,	I can not, certainly, though I should die,
Forbere to been out of youre compaignye	Bear to be out of your company
For verray love; this is withouten doute.	For true love; this is without doubt.
Now kys me, wyf, and lat us rome aboute."	Now kiss me, wife, and let us roam about."
This fresshe May, whan she thise wordes herde,	This fresh May, when she these words heard,
Benyngnely to Januarie answerde,	Graciously to January answered,
But first and forward she bigan to wepe.	But first of all she began to weep.
"I have," quod she, "a soule for to kepe	"I have," said she, "a soul to keep
As wel as ye, and also myn honour,	As well as you, and also my honor,
And of my wyfhod thilke tendre flour,	And of my wifehood that same tender flower,
Which that I have assured in youre hond,	Which I have entrusted in your hand,
Whan that the preest to yow my body bond;	When the priest to you my body bound;
Wherfore I wole answere in this manere,	Wherefore I will answer in this manner,
By the leve of yow, my lord so deere:	By the leave of you, my lord so dear:
I prey to God that nevere dawe the day	I pray to God that never dawn the day
That I ne sterve, as foule as womman may,	That I do not die, as foully as woman can,
If evere I do unto my kyn that shame,	If ever I do unto my kin that shame,
Or elles I empeyre so my name,	Or else I damage so my name,
That I be fals; and if I do that lak,	That I be false; and if I commit that offense,
Do strepe me and put me in a sak,	Have me stripped and put me in a sack,
And in the nexte ryver do me drenche.	And in the next river have me drowned.
I am a gentil womman and no wenche.	I am a gentle woman and no wench.
Why speke ye thus? But men been evere untrewe,	Why speak you thus? But men are always untrue,
And wommen have repreve of yow ay newe.	And women have reproof of you always.
Ye han noon oother contenance, I leeve,	You have no other manner of behavior, I believe,
But speke to us of untrust and repreeve."	Except to speak to us of distrust and reproof."
And with that word she saugh wher Damyan	And with that word she saw where Damian
Sat in the bussh, and coughen she bigan,	Sat in the bush, and she began to cough,
And with hir fynger signes made she	And with her finger signs made she
That Damyan sholde clymbe upon a tree	That Damian should climb upon a tree
That charged was with fruyt, and up he wente.	That loaded was with fruit, and up he went.
For verraily he knew al hire entente,	For truly he knew all her plan,
And every signe that she koude make,	And every sign that she could make,
Wel bet than Januarie, hir owene make,	Well better than January, her own mate,
For in a lettre she hadde toold hym al	For in a letter she had told him all
Of this matere, how he werchen shal.	Of this matter, what he must do.
And thus I lete hym sitte upon the pyrie,	And thus I let him sit upon the pear tree,
And Januarie and May romynge myrie.	And January and May roaming merrily.
Bright was the day, and blew the firmament;	Bright was the day, and blue the firmament;
Phebus hath of gold his stremes doun ysent	Phoebus has his streams of gold down sent
To gladen every flour with his warmnesse.	To gladden every flower with his warmness.
He was that tyme in Geminis, as I gesse,	He was that time in Gemini, as I guess,
But litel fro his declynacion	But little from his declination
Of Cancer, Jovis exaltacion.	Of Cancer, Jove's exaltation.
And so bifel, that brighte morwe-tyde	And it so befell, that bright morning-tide
That in that gardyn, in the ferther syde,	That in that garden, in the further side,
Pluto, that is kyng of Fayerye,	Pluto, that is king of Fairyland,
And many a lady in his compaignye,	And many a lady in his company,
Folwynge his wyf, the queene Proserpyna,	Following his wife, the queen Proserpine,
Which that he ravysshed out of [Ethna]	Whom he kidnapped out of Etna
Whil that she gadered floures in the mede --	While she gathered flowers in the mead --
In Claudyan ye may the stories rede,	In Claudian you can read the stories,
How in his grisely carte he hire fette --	How in his grisly chariot he fetched her --
This kyng of Fairye thanne adoun hym sette	This king of Fairyland then set himself down
Upon a bench of turves, fressh and grene,	Upon a bench made of pieces of turf, fresh and green,
And right anon thus seyde he to his queene:	And right away thus said he to his queen:
"My wyf," quod he, "ther may no wight seye nay;	"My wife," said he, "there can no one say nay;
Th' experience so preveth every day	The experience so proves every day
The tresons whiche that wommen doon to man.	The treasons which women do to man.
Ten hondred thousand [tales] tellen I kan	Ten hundred thousand [tales] I can tell
Notable of youre untrouthe and brotilnesse.	(That are) famous concerning your faithlessness and frailty.
O Salomon, wys, and richest of richesse,	O Solomon, wise, and richest of wealth,
Fulfild of sapience and of worldly glorie,	Filled with wisdom and with worldly glory,
Ful worthy been thy wordes to memorie	Full worthy are thy words to (keep in) memory
To every wight that wit and reson kan.	To every one that wit and reason knows.
Thus preiseth he yet the bountee of man:	Thus praises he yet the goodness of man:
`Amonges a thousand men yet foond I oon,	`Amongst a thousand men yet found I one,
But of wommen alle foond I noon.'	But of all women found I none.'
"Thus seith the kyng that knoweth youre wikkednesse.	"Thus says the king that knows your wickedness.
And Jhesus, filius Syrak, as I gesse,	And Jesus, son of Sirak, as I suppose,
Ne speketh of yow but seelde reverence.	Speaks reverence of you but seldom.
A wylde fyr and corrupt pestilence	A wild fir and corrupt pestilence
So falle upon youre bodyes yet to-nyght!	Fall upon your bodies yet to-night!
Ne se ye nat this honurable knyght,	See you not this honorable knight,
By cause, allas, that he is blynd and old,	Because, alas, that he is blind and old,
His owene man shal make hym cokewold.	His own man shall make him cuckold.
Lo, where he sit, the lechour, in the tree!	Lo, where he sits, the lecher, in the tree!
Now wol I graunten, of my magestee,	Now will I grant, of my majesty,
Unto this olde, blynde, worthy knyght	Unto this old, blind, worthy knight
That he shal have ayen his eyen syght,	That he shall have again his eyes' sight,
Whan that his wyf wold doon hym vileynye.	When his wife would do him villainy.
Thanne shal he knowen al hire harlotrye,	Then shall he know all her harlotry,
Bothe in repreve of hire and othere mo."	In reproof of both her and many others."
"Ye shal?" quod Proserpyne, "wol ye so?	"You shall?" said Proserpine, "will you so?
Now by my moodres sires soule I swere	Now by my mother's father's soul I swear
That I shal yeven hire suffisant answere,	That I shall give her sufficient answer,
And alle wommen after, for hir sake,	And all women afterwards, for her sake,
That, though they be in any gilt ytake,	That, though they be in any guilt taken,
With face boold they shulle hemself excuse,	With bold face they shall themselves excuse,
And bere hem doun that wolden hem accuse.	And bear them down who would them accuse.
For lak of answere noon of hem shal dyen.	For lack of answer none of them shall die.
Al hadde man seyn a thyng with bothe his yen,	Although a man had seen a thing with both his eyes,
Yit shul we wommen visage it hardily,	Yet shall we women face it out boldly,
And wepe, and swere, and chyde subtilly,	And weep, and swear, and chide deceitfully,
So that ye men shul been as lewed as gees.	So that you men shall be as ignorant as geese.
"What rekketh me of youre auctoritees?	"What do I care for your authorities?
I woot wel that this Jew, this Salomon,	I know well that this Jew, this Solomon,
Foond of us wommen fooles many oon.	Found of us women many a fool.
But though that he ne foond no good womman,	But though he found no good woman,
Yet hath ther founde many another man	Yet many another man has there found
Wommen ful trewe, ful goode, and vertuous.	Women full true, full good, and virtuous.
Witnesse on hem that dwelle in Cristes hous;	Witness on them that dwell in Christ's house (heaven);
With martirdom they preved hire constance.	With martyrdom they proved their constancy.
The Romayn geestes eek make remembrance	The Roman histories also remind us
Of many a verray, trewe wyf also.	Of many a genuine, true wife also.
But, sire, ne be nat wrooth, al be it so,	But, sir, be not angry, even though it be so,
Though that he seyde he foond no good womman,	Though he said he found no good woman,
I prey yow take the sentence of the man;	I pray you take the meaning of the man;
He mente thus, that in sovereyn bontee	He meant thus, that in perfect goodness
Nis noon but God, but neither he ne she.	There is no one but God, neither man nor woman.
"Ey! for verray God that nys but oon,	"Ah! by him who is the only true God,
What make ye so muche of Salomon?	Why make you so much of Solomon?
What though he made a temple, Goddes hous?	Why though he made a temple, God's house?
What though he were riche and glorious?	Why though he was rich and glorious?
So made he eek a temple of false goddis.	So made he also a temple of false gods.
How myghte he do a thyng that moore forbode is?	How might he do a thing that more forbidden is?
Pardee, as faire as ye his name emplastre,	By God, however approvingly you gloss over his name,
He was a lecchour and an ydolastre,	He was a lecher and an idolater,
And in his elde he verray God forsook;	And in his old age he true God forsook;
And if God ne hadde, as seith the book,	And if God had not, as says the book,
Yspared him for his fadres sake, he sholde	Spared him for his father's sake, he should
Have lost his regne rather than he wolde.	Have lost his reign sooner than he would have wanted.
I sette right noght, of al the vileynye	I reckon all the villainy
That ye of wommen write, a boterflye!	That you of women write not worth a butterfly!
I am a womman, nedes moot I speke,	I am a woman, I must necessarily speak,
Or elles swelle til myn herte breke.	Or else swell until my heart breaks.
For sithen he seyde that we been jangleresses,	For since he said that we are chatterers,
As evere hool I moote brouke my tresses,	As ever whole I may enjoy my hair (remain alive),
I shal nat spare, for no curteisye,	I shall not cease, for any courtesy,
To speke hym harm that wolde us vileynye."	To speak harm of him that would do us dishonor."
"Dame," quod this Pluto, "be no lenger wrooth;	"My Lady," said this Pluto, "be no longer angry;
I yeve it up! But sith I swoor myn ooth	I give it up! But since I swore my oath
That I wolde graunten hym his sighte ageyn,	That I would grant him his sight again,
My word shal stonde, I warne yow certeyn.	My word shall stand, I warn you certainly.
I am a kyng; it sit me noght to lye."	I am a king; it is not proper for me to lie."
"And I," quod she, "a queene of Fayerye!	"And I," said she, "a queen of Fairy!
Hir answere shal she have, I undertake.	Her answer shall she have, I declare.
Lat us namoore wordes heerof make;	Let us have no more words concerning this;
For sothe, I wol no lenger yow contrarie."	For truly, I will no longer contradict you."
Now lat us turne agayn to Januarie,	Now let us turn again to January,
That in the gardyn with his faire May	That in the garden with his fair May
Syngeth ful murier than the papejay,	Sings full merrier than the parrot,
"Yow love I best, and shal, and oother noon."	"You love I best, and shall, and none other."
So longe aboute the aleyes is he goon,	So long about the garden paths is he gone,
Til he was come agaynes thilke pyrie	Until he was come in front of that same pear tree
Where as this Damyan sitteth ful myrie	Where this Damian sits full merry
An heigh among the fresshe leves grene.	On high among the fresh leaves green.
This fresshe May, that is so bright and sheene,	This fresh May, who is so bright and sheen,
Gan for to syke, and seyde, "Allas, my syde!	Began to sigh, and said, "Alas, my side!
Now sire," quod she, "for aught that may bityde,	Now sire," said she, "for whatever may happen,
I moste han of the peres that I see,	I must have some of the pears that I see,
Or I moot dye, so soore longeth me	Or I must die, so sore I long
To eten of the smale peres grene.	To eat some of the small green pears.
Help, for hir love that is of hevene queene!	Help, for her love that is of heaven queen!
I telle yow wel, a womman in my plit	I tell you well, a woman in my condition
May han to fruyt so greet an appetit	May have for fruit so great an appetite
That she may dyen but she of it have."	That she may die but she have some of it."
"Allas," quod he, "that I ne had heer a knave	"Alas," said he, "that I do not have here a servant boy
That koude clymbe! Allas, allas," quod he,	That could climb! Alas, alas," said he,
"For I am blynd!" "Ye, sire, no fors," quod she;	"For I am blind!" "Yea, sir, no matter," said she;
"But wolde ye vouche sauf, for Goddes sake,	"But would you grant, for God's sake,
The pyrie inwith youre armes for to take,	The pear tree within your arms to take,
For wel I woot that ye mystruste me,	For well I know that you mistrust me,
Thanne sholde I clymbe wel ynogh," quod she,	Then should I climb well enough," said she,
"So I my foot myghte sette upon youre bak."	"If I my foot might set upon your back."
"Certes," quod he, "theron shal be no lak,	"Certainly," said he, "there shall be no lack,
Mighte I yow helpen with myn herte blood."	(Even if) I might you help with my heart's blood."
He stoupeth doun, and on his bak she stood,	He stoops down, and on his back she stood,
And caughte hire by a twiste, and up she gooth --	And caught her by a branch, and up she goes --
Ladyes, I prey yow that ye be nat wrooth;	Ladies, I pray you that you be not angry;
I kan nat glose, I am a rude man --	I can not use circumlocutions, I am an unlearned man --
And sodeynly anon this Damyan	And suddenly at once this Damian
Gan pullen up the smok, and in he throng.	Pulled up the smock, and in he thrust.
And whan that Pluto saugh this grete wrong,	And when Pluto saw this great wrong,
To Januarie he gaf agayn his sighte,	To January he gave again his sight,
And made hym se as wel as evere he myghte.	And made him see as well as he ever could.
And whan that he hadde caught his sighte agayn,	And when he had recovered his sight again,
Ne was ther nevere man of thyng so fayn,	There was never man of anything so happy,
But on his wyf his thoght was everemo.	But on his wife his thought was evermore.
Up to the tree he caste his eyen two,	Up to the tree he cast his eyes two,
And saugh that Damyan his wyf had dressed	And saw that Damian had treated his wife
In swich manere it may nat been expressed,	In such a manner it can not be expressed,
But if I wolde speke uncurteisly;	Unless I would speak crudely;
And up he yaf a roryng and a cry,	And up he gave a roaring and a cry,
As dooth the mooder whan the child shal dye:	As does the mother when the child shall die:
"Out! Help! Allas! Harrow!" he gan to crye,	"Out! Help! Alas! Help!" he began to cry,
"O stronge lady stoore, what dostow?"	"O brazen crude lady, what dost thou?"
And she answerde, "Sire, what eyleth yow?	And she answered, "Sir, what ails you?
Have pacience and resoun in youre mynde.	Have patience and reason in your mind.
I have yow holpe on bothe youre eyen blynde.	I have helped you with both your eyes blind.
Up peril of my soule, I shal nat lyen,	Upon peril of my soul, I shall not lie,
As me was taught, to heele with youre eyen,	As I was taught, to heal with your eyes,
Was no thyng bet, to make yow to see,	Was no thing better, to make you to see,
Than strugle with a man upon a tree.	Than to struggle with a man upon a tree.
God woot, I dide it in ful good entente."	God knows, I did it in full good intent."
"Strugle?" quod he, "Ye, algate in it wente!	"Struggle?" said he, "Yea, indeed in it went!
God yeve yow bothe on shames deth to dyen!	God give you both a shameful death to die!
He swyved thee; I saugh it with myne yen,	He screwed thee; I saw it with my eyes,
And elles be I hanged by the hals!"	And else may I be hanged by the neck!"
"Thanne is," quod she, "my medicyne fals;	"Then is," said she, "my medicine false;
For certeinly, if that ye myghte se,	For certainly, if you could see,
Ye wolde nat seyn thise wordes unto me.	You would not say these words unto me.
Ye han som glymsyng, and no parfit sighte."	You have some glimpse, and no perfect sight."
"I se," quod he, "as wel as evere I myghte,	"I see," said he, "as well as ever I could,
Thonked be God! With bothe myne eyen two,	Thanked be God! With both my eyes two,
And by my trouthe, me thoughte he dide thee so."	And by my troth, it seemed to me he did thee so."
"Ye maze, maze, goode sire," quod she;	"You are dazed, dazed, good sir," said she;
"This thank have I for I have maad yow see.	"This thanks have I because I have made you see.
Allas," quod she, "that evere I was so kynde!"	Alas," said she, "that ever I was so kind!"
"Now, dame," quod he, "lat al passe out of mynde.	"Now, lady," said he, "let all pass out of mind.
Com doun, my lief, and if I have myssayd,	Come down, my dear, and if I have misspoken,
God helpe me so, as I am yvele apayd.	So God help me, I am very sorry.
But, by my fader soule, I wende han seyn	But, by my father's soul, I thought to have seen
How that this Damyan hadde by thee leyn,	How this Damian had by thee laid,
And that thy smok hadde leyn upon his brest."	And thy smock had lain upon his breast."
"Ye, sire," quod she, "ye may wene as yow lest.	"Yea, sir," said she, "you may think as you please.
But, sire, a man that waketh out of his sleep,	But, sir, a man that wakes out of his sleep,
He may nat sodeynly wel taken keep	He can not suddenly well take heed
Upon a thyng, ne seen it parfitly,	Of a thing, nor see it perfectly,
Til that he be adawed verraily.	Until he be fully awakened.
Right so a man that longe hath blynd ybe,	Right so a man that long has blind been,
Ne may nat sodeynly so wel yse,	Can not suddenly so well see,
First whan his sighte is newe come ageyn,	First when his sight is newly come again,
As he that hath a day or two yseyn.	As he that has a day or two been able to see.
Til that youre sighte ysatled be a while	Until your sight be settled a while
Ther may ful many a sighte yow bigile.	There may full many a sight deceive you.
Beth war, I prey yow, for by hevene kyng,	Beware, I pray you, for by heaven's king,
Ful many a man weneth to seen a thyng,	Full many a man supposes to see a thing,
And it is al another than it semeth.	And it is entirely different than it seems.
He that mysconceyveth, he mysdemeth."	He that misunderstands, he misjudges."
And with that word she leep doun fro the tree.	And with that word she leaped down from the tree.
This Januarie, who is glad but he?	This January, who is glad but he?
He kisseth hire and clippeth hire ful ofte,	He kisses her and embraces her full often,
And on hire wombe he stroketh hire ful softe,	And on her womb he strokes her full softly,
And to his palays hoom he hath hire lad.	And to his palace he has her led home.
Now, goode men, I pray yow to be glad.	Now, good men, I pray you to be glad.
Thus endeth heere my tale of Januarie;	Thus ends here my tale of January;
God blesse us, and his mooder Seinte Marie!	God bless us, and his mother Saint Mary!
"Ey! Goddes mercy!" seyde oure Hooste tho,	"Ah! God's mercy!" said our Host then,
"Now swich a wyf I pray God kepe me fro!	"Now such a wife I pray God keep me from!
Lo, whiche sleightes and subtilitees	Lo, what tricks and craftiness
In wommen been! For ay as bisy as bees	Are in women! For always as busy as bees
Been they, us sely men for to deceyve,	Are they, us innocent men to deceive,
And from the soothe evere wol they weyve;	And from the truth ever will they deviate;
By this Marchauntes tale it preveth weel.	By this Merchant's tale it is well proven.
But doutelees, as trewe as any steel	But doubtless, as true as any steel
I have a wyf, though that she povre be,	I have a wife, though that she poor be,
But of hir tonge, a labbyng shrewe is she,	But of her tongue, a blabbing shrew is she,
And yet she hath an heep of vices mo;	And yet she has a heap of other vices;
Therof no fors! Lat alle swiche thynges go.	Thereof no matter! Let all such things go by.
But wyte ye what? In conseil be it seyd,	But know you what? In secret be it said,
Me reweth soore I am unto hire teyd.	I sorely rue that I am unto her tied.
For and I sholde rekenen every vice	For if I should reckon every vice
Which that she hath, ywis I were to nyce.	Which she has, indeed I would be too foolish.
And cause why? It sholde reported be	And the cause why? It should reported be
And toold to hire of somme of this meynee --	And told to her by some of this company --
Of whom, it nedeth nat for to declare,	By whom, it needs not to declare,
Syn wommen konnen outen swich chaffare;	Since women know how to display such wares;
And eek my wit suffiseth nat therto	And also my wit suffices not concerning this
To tellen al; wherfore my tale is do."	To tell all; therefore my tale is done."
