God send every true man remedy for his troubles!	God sende every trewe man boote of his bale!
And there (put) a period, for my tale is ended.	And there a poynt, for ended is my tale.
Though he practice alchemy all his life.	Thogh that he multiplie terme of his lyve.
To his will, certainly, never shall he thrive,	Of his wil, certes, never shal he thryve,
As to do any thing in contrary	As for to werken any thyng in contrarie
For whoever makes God his adversary,	For whoso maketh God his adversarie,
I advise, as for the best, let it go.	I rede, as for the beste, lete it goon.
How a man shall come unto this stone,	How that a man shal come unto this stoon,
Does not wish that the alchemists should tell	Ne wil nat that the philosophres nevene
Whomever he pleases; lo, this is the end."	Whom that hym liketh; lo, this is the ende."
To enlighten men, and also to forbid	Men for t'enspire, and eek for to deffende
Except where it is pleasing to his deity	But where it liketh to his deitee
That He does not wish that it be discovered,	That he wol nat that it discovered bee,
For unto Christ it is so beloved and dear	For unto Crist it is so lief and deere
Nor in any book write it in any way.	Ne in no book it write in no manere.
That they should reveal it unto no one,	That they sholden discovere it unto noon,
The alchemists were sworn every single one	The philosophres sworn were everychoon
"Nay, nay," said Plato, "certainly, that I will not.	"Nay, nay," quod Plato, "certein, that I nyl.
Good sir," said he then, "Tell me the basic constituent	"Telle me the roote, good sire," quod he tho,
Of the four elements," said Plato.	Of elementes foure," quod Plato.
"It is a liquid that is made, I say,	"It is a water that is maad, I seye,
What is Magnesia, good sir, I pray you?"	What is Magnasia, good sire, I yow preye?"
This is explaining the unknown by the more unknown.	This is ignotum per ignocius.
Said Plato. "Yes, sir, and is it thus?	Seyde Plato. "Ye, sire, and is it thus?
"What is that?" said he. "Magnesia is the same,"	"Which is that?" quod he. "Magnasia is the same,"
"Take the stone that men name Titanos."	"Take the stoon that men name Titanos."
And Plato answered unto him straightaway,	And Plato answerde unto hym anoon,
And this was his question in truth:	And this was his demande in soothfastnesse:
As his book Senior will bear witness,	As his book Senior wol bere witnesse,
That one time said to his master,	That on a tyme seyde his maister to,
Also there was a disciple of Plato,	Also ther was a disciple of Plato,
"Concerns the secret of the secrets, by God."	"Is of the secree of the secretes, pardee."
For this science and this cunning," said he,	For this science and this konnyng," quod he,
And if he do, he is an ignorant man.	And if he do, he is a lewed man.
Of alchemists can understand;	Of philosophres understonde kan;
Unless he the meaning and speech	But if that he th'entencioun and speche
"And therefore," said he -- take heed of my words --	"And therfore," seyde he -- taak heede to my sawe --
That out of Sol (gold) and Luna (silver) were drawn.	That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe.
He understood, and brimstone by his brother,	He understood, and brymstoon by his brother,
By the dragon, Mercury, and none other	By the dragon, Mercurie, and noon oother
By his brother; and that is to say,	With his brother; and that is for to sayn,
Does not die unless he be slain	Ne dyeth nat but if that he be slayn
He says that the dragon, doubtless,	He seith how that the dragon, doutelees,
Was father of philosophers, Hermes Trismegistus;	Of philosophres fader was, Hermes;
Although he who first said this thing	How [be] that he which that first seyde this thyng
"There is no man who can harden mercury	"Ther may no man mercurie mortifie
He says right thus, without any lie:	He seith right thus, withouten any lye:
As his book Rosari makes mention;	As his Rosarie maketh mencioun;
Lo, thus says Arnold of the New Town,	Lo, thus seith Arnold of the Newe Toun,
What alchemists say in this matter.	What philosophres seyn in this mateere.
And very quickly I will you tell here	And right as swithe I wol yow tellen heere
For if you do, your prosperity is completely gone.	For if ye doon, youre thrift is goon ful clene.
Meddle no more with that art, I mean,	Medleth namoore with that art, I mene,
Withdraw the fire, lest it burn too fast;	Withdraweth the fir, lest it to faste brenne;
You shall gain nothing on that transaction,	Ye shul nothyng wynne on that chaffare,
For though you look never so broadly and stare,	For though ye looken never so brode and stare,
See that your mind lacks nothing of its sight.	Looke that youre mynde lakke noght his sight.
If your eyes can not see clearly,	If that youre eyen kan nat seen aright,
So fare you who multiply, I say.	So faren ye that multiplie, I seye.
As to go around it in the road.	As for to goon bisides in the weye.
He is as likely to run against a stone	He is as boold to renne agayn a stoon
That blunders forth and takes account of no peril.	That blondreth forth and peril casteth noon.
You are as heedless as is Bayard the blind horse,	Ye been as boold as is Bayard the blynde,
Never to thrive would be too long a time.	Nevere to thryve were to long a date.
Lest you lose all; for late is better than never.	Lest ye lese al; for bet than nevere is late.
You who use it, I advise you let it go,	Ye that it use, I rede ye it leete,
Alas, can they not flee the fire's heat?	Allas, kan they nat flee the fires heete?
O, fie, for shame! Those who have been burned,	O, fy, for shame! They that han been brent,
Of those who have lent their wealth for that purpose.	Of hem that han hir good therto ylent.
And make folk to deserve curses	And maken folk for to purchacen curses
And empty also great and heavy purses,	And empten also grete and hevye purses,
It will turn a man's mirth into sorrow,	A mannes myrthe it wol turne unto grame,
To transmute metals, and bring his wealth to nothing!	To multiplie, and brynge his good to naught!
A man can easily learn, if he have anything,	A man may lightly lerne, if he have aught,
But to their purpose shall they never attain.	But to hir purpos shul they nevere atteyne.
And in their technical terms set their desire and pain,	And in hir termes sette hir lust and peyne,
They may well chatter as do jays,	They mowe wel chiteren as doon jayes,
For any wit that men have now-a-days.	For any wit that men han now-a-dayes.
About this craft that men can not come to it,	In this craft that men kan nat come therby,
Philosophers speak so mystically	Philosophres speken so mystily
The greatest cause of such scarcity.	The cause grettest of swich scarsetee.
This transmutation blinds so many a one	This multiplying blent so many oon
So widespread that there is hardly any gold left.	So ferforth that unnethes is ther noon.
Betwixt men and gold there is conflict	Bitwixe men and gold ther is debaat
Consider, sirs, how, in each social rank,	Considereth, sires, how that, in ech estaat,
To bring folk to their destruction.	To brynge folk to hir destruccioun.
Thus he makes his introductory gambit,	Thus maketh he his introduccioun,
Lo, thus tricked and beguiled was he!	Lo, thus byjaped and bigiled was he!
Of this recipe, farewell! It would not work.	Of this receit, farwel! It wolde nat be.
At such time as he wanted, make a trial	Maken assay, at swich tyme as he wolde,
He went his way, and never the priest him saw	He wente his wey, and never the preest hym sy
Said the canon, "and farewell, many thanks!"	Quod the chanoun, "and farwel, grant mercy!"
"For your good will, sir, you have givem right good proof,"	"For youre good wyl, sire, have ye right good preef,"
Than that you should fall in such distress."	Than that ye sholden falle in swich mescheef."
That I have, and otherwise I would rather go mad,	Which that I have, and elles wexe I wood,
Yet would I rather spend all the wealth	Yet hadde I levere spenden al the good
"God forbid it," said the priest, "what say you?	"God it forbeede," quod the preest, "what sey ye?
I should be dead; there would be no other way."	I sholde be deed; ther were noon oother weye."
Of me because of my science	To me by cause of my philosophye
For, if men knew of all my esoteric skill,	For, and men knewen al my soutiltee,
And, as you love me, keep it secret.	And, as ye love me, kepeth it secree.
For my craft, for I would that it were kept confidential;	Of my craft, for I wolde it kept were cloos;
"Sir priest," he said, "I do not care to have fame	"Sire preest," he seyde, "I kepe han no loos
All his working was nothing but fraud and deceit.	Al his werkyng nas but fraude and deceite.
To this canon for this same recipe.	To this chanoun for this ilke receite.
Of nobles fetched, and gave every one of them	Of nobles fette, and took hem everichon
This priest right away the sum of forty pounds	This preest the somme of fourty pound anon
To me, you should pay more, indeed."	To me, ye sholde paye moore, ywis."
You must pay forty pounds, so help me God!	Ye shul paye fourty pound, so God me save!
Sir, at one word, if thou want to have it,	Sire, at o word, if that thee list it have,
"Indeed," said he, "as I say, it is very expensive.	"Ywis," quod he, "it is ful deere, I seye.
What shall I pay? Tell me, I pray."	What shal I paye? Telleth me, I preye."
"No matter," said he, "now, sir, for God's sake,	"No fors," quod he, "now, sire, for Goddes sake,
There is no man in England who can make it."	In Engelond ther kan no man it make."
I warn you well; for except for me and a friar,	I warne yow wel; for save I and a frere,
"By our Lady," said this canon, "it is expensive,	"By oure Lady," quod this chanon, "it is deere,
What shall this recipe cost? Tell now!"	What shal this receite coste? Telleth now!"
"For love of God, Who died for us all,	"For love of God, that for us alle deyde,
And to the canon thus he spoke and said:	And to the chanoun thus he spak and seyde:
Than this priest had to learn this sorry craft.	Than hadde this preest this soory craft to leere.
To stand in the good graces of his dear lady,	To stonden in grace of his lady deere,
Nor knight in arms to do a hardy deed,	Ne knyght in armes to doon an hardy dede,
Or to speak of love and womanhood,	Or for to speke of love and wommanhede,
Nor lady more enthusiastic in singing carols to spring,	Ne lady lustier in carolynge,
Was never none that was more eager to sing;	Was nevere noon that luste bet to synge;
Nor nightingale in the season of May,	Ne nyghtyngale, in the sesoun of May,
This deluded priest, who was gladder than he?	This sotted preest, who was gladder than he?
But that they were as they ought to be.	But that they weren as hem oghte be.
Of fire and hammer; no man could say nay,	To fir and hamer; myghte no man seye nay,
They went and put these bars to the test	They wente and putte thise teynes in assay
Unto the goldsmith with these three bars	Unto the goldsmyth with thise teynes three
And that very quickly shall be tested."	And that as swithe preeved it shal bee."
Unless they be silver pure and good,	But if that they were silver fyn and good,
For, by my faith, I would not (have them), for (the cost of) my hood,	For, by my feith, I nolde, for myn hood,
To some goldsmith and learn if they are worth anything,	To som goldsmyth and wite if they been oght,
And then said the canon, "Let us go	And thanne seyde the chanoun, "Lat us gon
This priest quickly took up this silver bar,	This preest took up this silver teyne anon,
Put in your hand, and see what is there."	Putte in youre hand, and looketh what is theer."
Help me now, as I did you before;	Helpeth me now, as I dide yow whileer;
"Stoop down. By God, you are to blame!	"Stoupeth adoun. By God, ye be to blame!
And to him spoke, and thus said jokingly:	And to hym spak, and thus seyde in his game:
And hid it, and grabbed him by his coat,	And hidde it, and hym hente by the breest,
The copper bar, this priest not knowing,	The coper teyne, noght knowynge this preest,
And wonderfully secretly took up also	And wonder pryvely took up also
And in the pan's bottom he has left it;	And in the pannes botme he hath it laft;
This priest not knowing of his false craft,	Unwityng this preest of his false craft,
He slyly took it out, this cursed rascal,	He slyly took it out, this cursed heyne,
Heard me tell) he had a small bar of silver.	Herde me telle) he hadde a silver teyne.
And in his sleeve (as you before-hand	And in his sleve (as ye biforen-hand
Of water, and in he put his own hand,	Of water, and in he putte his owene hand,
And put it at the last into the pan	And in the panne putte it at the laste
And afterward he cast the ingot in it,	And afterward in the ingot he it caste,
Exactly as he wished, he made the priest his ape!	Right as hym liste, the preest he made his ape!
And in his working to stoop low,	And in his werkyng for to stoupe lowe,
And cast in powder, and made the priest to blow,	And caste in poudre, and made the preest to blowe,
And on the fire quickly he has set it,	And on the fir as swithe he hath it set,
He put this ounce of copper in the crucible,	He putte this ounce of coper in the crosselet,
And for no other cause, truly.	And for noon oother cause, trewely.
With the intention that men may be warned by this,	To th'entente that men may be war therby,
And nonetheless I will yet express it,	And nathelees yet wol I it expresse,
It wearies me to tell of his falseness,	It weerieth me to telle of his falsnesse,
But he was fiendish both in deed and thought.	But he was feendly bothe in werk and thoght.
Of this canon, root of all cursedness!	Of this chanoun, roote of alle cursednesse!
As servant of my wit, the duplicity	As ministre of my wit, the doublenesse
All too simple is my tongue to pronounce,	Al to symple is my tonge to pronounce,
And of that copper weighed out only an ounce.	And of that coper weyed out but an ounce.
And this canon took it in his hands,	And this chanon it in his handes nam,
He went his way, and with the copper came back,	He wente his wey, and with the coper cam,
Now, good sir, go forth thy way and hurry thee."	Now, goode sire, go forth thy wey and hy the."
"Otherwise go buy us some, and do that quickly;	"Elles go bye us som, and that as swithe;
"Yes," said the priest, "sir, I believe well there is some."	"Ye," quod the preest, "sire, I trowe wel ther be."
I warn thee, there is yet more to come.	I warne thee, yet is ther moore bihynde.
"Though I be poor, thou shalt find me skilfull.	"Though poure I be, crafty thou shalt me fynde.
Body and possessions. "Yes," quickly said the canon,	Body and good. "Ye," quod the chanoun soone,
And to the canon he offered again	And to the chanoun he profred eftsoone
In any manner his mirth and his gladness;	In no manere his myrthe and his gladnesse;
He was so glad that I can not express	He was so glad that I kan nat expresse
Supposing nothing but truth, sooth to say,	Supposynge noght but treuthe, sooth to seyn,
When this priest was thus beguiled again,	Whan that this preest thus was bigiled ageyn,
Now, good sirs, what more will you have?	Now, good sires, what wol ye bet than wel?
And all that was in the stick went out,	And al that in the stikke was out yede,
Unless he be a fool, knows well it must by necessity,	But it a fool be, woot wel it moot nede,
The wax next to the fire, as every man,	The wex agayn the fir, as every man,
He stirred the coals until it began to melt	He stired the coles til relente gan
That was prepared with that false contrivance,	That was ordeyned with that false jet,
And with this stick, above the crucible,	And with this stikke, above the crosselet,
For he was ever false in thought and deed --	For he was evere fals in thoght and dede --
Flay him, I pray to God, for his falsehood!	Hym terve, I pray to God, for his falshede!
As he did before-- the devil out of his skin	As he dide er -- the devel out of his skyn
This canon with his stick began to go	This chanoun with his stikke gan hym dresse
And while this priest was busy with his work,	And whil this preest was in his bisynesse,
To keep in his filings every bit.	For to kepe in his lemaille every deel.
Was in his coal, and well sealed shut with wax	Was in his cole, and stopped with wex weel
Of silver filings was put, as before	Of silver lemaille put was, as bifore
In the end of which an ounce, and no more,	In the ende of which an ounce, and namoore,
A hollow stick -- pay attention and beware! --	An holwe stikke -- taak kep and be war! --
And for show in his hand he bore	And for a contenaunce in his hand he bar
Was all ready to beguile this priest again,	Al redy was this preest eft to bigile,
In order to come to the realization of his desire.	For to come to th' effect of his desir.
Commanded him, and blew hard on the fire,	Comanded hym, and faste blew the fir,
To do as this canon, this cursed man,	To doon as this chanoun, this cursed man,
This priest busies himself in all that he knows how	This preest hym bisieth in al that he kan
With that other, which now is silver."	With that oother, which that now silver is."
And do therewith as you have done before this	And do therwith as ye han doon er this
"Of quicksilver, without more words,	"Of quyksilver, withouten wordes mo,
Let's take another ounce," said he then,	Lat take another ounce," quod he tho,
This discipline and this ingenious science.	This disciplyne and this crafty science.
And be expert concerning this, and when you are in need	And been expert of this, and in youre neede
The second time, that you may pay attention	The seconde tyme, that ye may taken heede
Said the canon, "Yet I will make trial	Quod the chanoun, "Yet wol I make assay
I will be yours in all that ever I can."	I wol be youre in al that evere I may."
This noble craft and this esoteric art,	This noble craft and this subtilitee,
But, if you condescend to teach me	But, and ye vouche-sauf to techen me
Said the priest, "and may I have their curse,	Seyde the preest, "and I hir malisoun,
And all saints, have you (in their protection), sir canon,"	And alle halwes, have ye, sire chanoun,"
"God's blessing, and his mother's also,	"Goddes blessyng, and his moodres also,
Of pure silver, and glad in every vein	Of silver fyn, and glad in every veyne
He put his hand in and took up a small bar	He putte his hand in and took up a teyne
Shaving of silver is silver, by God!	Shaving of silver silver is, pardee!
What else, devil of hell, should it be?	What, devel of helle, sholde it elles be?
Thou shalt find there silver, as I believe."	Thow fynde shalt ther silver, as I hope."
"See what is there; put in thy hand and grope.	"Loke what ther is; put in thyn hand and grope.
When it pleased him, and commanded the priest quickly,	Whan that hym luste, and bad the preest as faste,
And in the pan of water he cast it,	And in the water-vessel he it caste,
And put it in the ingot with merry demeanor,	And in th'yngot putte it with myrie cheere,
And in his sleeve again he did hide it,	And in his sleve agayn he gan it hide,
So slyly that the priest did not see it,	So slyly that the preest it nat espide,
Of this small bar, without any doubt,	Of this teyne, withouten any drede,
He shaped his ingot in the length and in the breadth	He shoop his ingot in lengthe and in breede
And pay attention now to his cursed trick!	And taaketh heede now of his cursed sleighte!
Which was not more than an ounce of weight.	Which that ne was nat but an ounce of weighte.
A small bar of silver -- may he have evil luck! --	A teyne of silver -- yvele moot he cheeve! --
I say, he took out of his own sleeve	I seye, he took out of his owene sleeve
Of an ingot, as I shall tell you.	Of an ingot, as I shal yow devyse.
Why should I tarry all the long day?	What sholde I tarien al the longe day?
And came back again without any delay.	And coome agayn withouten any delay.
And forth with them they carried the key,	And forth with hem they carieden the keye,
They opened and shut, and went their way.	They opened and shette, and wente hir weye.
The chamber door, shortly to say,	The chambre dore, shortly for to seyn,
But go with you and come with you again."	But go with yow and come with yow ageyn."
I will not be out of your presence,	I ne wol nat been out of youre presence,
Nor wrong opinion of me in your absence,	Ne wrong conceite of me in youre absence,
And yet, so that you shall have no suspicion	And yet, for ye shul han no mysbileeve
Full of water, and you shall see well then	Ful of water, and ye shul se wel thanne
And bring also with you a bowl or a pan	And bryngeth eek with yow a bolle or a panne
As is an ingot, if I may have such luck.	That is an ingot, if I may han hap.
For I will make it of the same shape	For I wol make it of the same shap
Go, walk forth, and bring a chalk stone;	Gooth, walketh forth, and bryngeth a chalk stoon;
And because I know well you have no ingot,	And for I woot wel ingot have ye noon,
"Rise up," said he, "sir priest, and stand by me;	"Ris up," quod he, "sire preest, and stondeth by me;
And when this alchemist saw his time,	And whan this alkamystre saugh his tyme,
For he understood nothing of that trick.	For of that sleighte he nothyng understood.
But of this the priest knew nothing, alas!	But therof wiste the preest nothyng, alas!
Since it was placed so exactly above.	Syn it so evene above couched was.
And so it must be necessarily, by reason,	And so it moste nedes, by resoun,
Into the crucible fell right down;	Into the crosselet fil anon adoun;
Was burned, all the filings out of the hole	Was brent, al the lemaille out of the hole
And when this canon's beech coal	And whan that this chanounes bechen cole
Sit we down, and let us make merry."	Sitte we doun, and lat us myrie make."
"Soon all shall be well, I guarantee.	"As swithe al shal be wel, I undertake.
"Now give us drink," said the canon then;	"Now yeve us drynke," quod the chanoun thenne;
Of the crucible, and blew well afterward	Of the crosselet, and blew wel afterward
And laid it above, upon the middle	And leyde it above upon the myddeward
This canon took his coal -- may he have bad luck! --	This chanoun took his cole -- with sory grace! --
And while the priest wiped his face,	And whiles that the preest wiped his face,
Have here a cloth, and wipe away the wetness."	Have heere a clooth, and wipe awey the wete."
You are very hot; I see well how you sweat.	Ye been right hoot; I se wel how ye swete.
For I have pity of you, by Saint Gile!	For of yow have I pitee, by Seint Gile!
"Now let me work with it but a while,	"Now lat me medle therwith but a while,
But soon I shall amend it," said he.	But soone I shal amenden it," quod he.
This canon said, "Friend, you do it wrong.	This chanoun seyde, "Freend, ye doon amys.
The coals, as I told you before this,	The coles, as I tolde yow er this,
And while the priest busily laid	And whiles the preest couched bisily
And in his hand he bore it secretly.	And in his hand he baar it pryvely.
He took his coal of which I spoke above,	He took his cole of which I spak above,
But pay attention now, sirs, for God's love!	But taketh heede now, sires, for Goddes love!
He is so changeable, he abides nowhere.	He is so variaunt, he abit nowhere.
If I knew how, but he is now here and now there;	If I wiste how, but he is heere and there;
I would like to avenge myself for his falsehood,	On his falshede fayn wolde I me wreke,
Until he had skinned him, he could not cease.	Til he had terved hym, koude he nat blynne.
And so he did, before they went apart;	And so he dide, er that they wente atwynne;
Before he came there, he intended to trick him,	Er he cam there, hym to bigile he thoghte,
Later, which he brought with him.	Herafterward, whiche that he with hym broghte.
And other things I shall tell more	And othere thynges I shal tellen moore
Was not made there, but it was made before;	Was nat maad ther, but it was maad bifore;
And understand that this false device	And understondeth that this false gyn
This hole with wax, to keep the filings in.	This hole with wex, to kepe the lemaille in.
An ounce, and was sealed shut, without doubt,	An ounce, and stopped was, withouten faille,
In which very skilfully was made a hole,	In which ful subtilly was maad an hole,
Out of his bosom took a beech coal,	Out of his bosom took a bechen cole,
This false canon -- may the foul fiend fetch him! --	This false chanoun -- the foule feend hym fecche! --
And while he was busy, this fiendish wretch,	And while he bisy was, this feendly wrecche,
And laid the coals as the canon bad.	And couched coles as the chanoun bad.
"Many thanks," said the priest, and was very glad,	"Graunt mercy," quod the preest, and was ful glad,
Shall do every thing that shall here be done."	Shul werche al thyng which that shal heer be do."
Said this canon, "thine own two hands	Quod this chanoun, "thyne owene handes two
The crucible. "To serve as a sign that I love thee,"	The crosselet. "For in tokenyng I thee love,"
With which to blind this priest; and bade him hasten	To blynde with this preest; and bad hym hye
Or something else, that was not worth a fly,	Or somwhat elles, was nat worth a flye,
Made, either of chalk, or of glass,	Ymaad, outher of chalk, outher of glas,
A powder, I do not know of what it was	A poudre, noot I wherof that it was
And this canon into the crucible cast	And this chanoun into the crosselet caste
And blew the fire, and busied himself very intently.	And blew the fir, and bisyed hym ful faste.
Upon the fire at once set this thing,	Upon the fir anon sette this thyng,
This priest, at this cursed canon's bidding,	This preest, at this cursed chanons biddyng,
And to their labor speedily they go.	And to hire labour spedily they gon.
This same servant right away went out,	This ilke servant anonright out yede,
All was in deed fulfilled as he commanded.	Al as he bad fulfilled was in dede.
While we work in this science."	Whils that we werke in this philosophie."
Our secret business, so that no man espy us,	Oure pryvetee, that no man us espie,
And shut the door, while we are about	And shette the dore, whils we been aboute
Send away your man, and have him be outside,	Voyde youre man, and lat hym be theroute,
My cunning, which I shall show you.	My konnyng, which that I yow shewen shal.
Shall make all good, for it is cause of all	Shal make al good, for it is cause of al
I have a powder here, that cost me dearly,	I have a poudre heer, that coste me deere,
And otherwise consider me false and unable	And elles holdeth me fals and unable
Or elsewhere, and make it malleable;	Or elleswhere, and make it malliable;
As there is any in your purse or mine,	As ther is any in youre purs or myn,
And make it as good silver and as fine	And make it as good silver and as fyn
Right in your sight indeed, without lie,	Right in youre sighte anon, withouten lye,
That this quicksilver I will harden	That this quyksilver I wol mortifye
For you shall see here, by experience,	For ye shul seen heer, by experience,
To show them thus so much of my science.	To shewen hem thus muche of my science.
There are very few to whom I would offer	Ther been ful fewe to whiche I wolde profre
An ounce of this quicksilver, and here begin,	Of this quyksilver an ounce, and heer bigynne,
Take in thy hand, and thyself put therein	Taak in thyn hand, and put thyself therinne
"This instrument," said he, "which thou seest,	"This instrument," quod he, "which that thou seest,
From his bosom, and showed it to the priest.	Of his bosom, and shewed it to the preest.
And this canon took out a crucible	And this chanoun took out a crosselet
The coals right away were fetched,	The coles right anon weren yfet,
So that he might go to his working right away.	That he anon myghte go to his werkynge.
And bad the servant to bring coals,	And bad the servant coles for to brynge,
And he laid them down neatly and carefully,	And he hem leyde faire and wel adoun,
With this quicksilver, shortly to say,	With this quyksilver, shortly for to sayn,
And went forth, and came right back again	And wente hym forth, and cam anon agayn
And he was all ready at his bidding,	And he al redy was at his biddyng,
He bad his servant fetch him this thing,	He bad his servant fecchen hym this thyng,
"Sir," said the priest, "it shall be done, indeed."	"Sire," quod the preest, "it shal be doon, ywis."
A wonderful thing, which you never saw before this."	A wonder thyng, which ye saugh nevere er this."
And when he comes, quickly you shall see	And whan he comth, as faste shal ye see
And have him bring two or three ounces;	And lat hym bryngen ounces two or three;
For quicksilver, would that we had it right now;	For quyksilver, that we it hadde anon;
Now pay attention to this canon's cursedness!	Now taak heede of this chanons cursednesse!
That have consumed and wasted my redness.	Consumed and wasted han my reednesse.
Of metals, which you have heard me rehearse,	Of metals, whiche ye han herd me reherce,
In my visage; for various fumes	In my visage; for fumes diverse
For redness have I none, very well I know,	For reednesse have I noon, right wel I knowe,
At least they begin to glow,	Algates they bigynnen for to glowe,
For shame of him my cheeks grow red.	For shame of hym my chekes wexen rede.
Every time I speak of his falsehood,	Evere whan that I speke of his falshede,
It distresses me to compose rimes about his falseness.	Of his falsnesse it dulleth me to ryme.
Who knows a hundred times more trickery.	That kan an hundred foold moore subtiltee.
It was another canon, and not he,	It was another chanoun, and nat hee,
Sir host, in faith, and by the heaven's queen,	Sire hoost, in feith, and by the hevenes queene,
This canon was my lord, you would suppose?	This chanon was my lord, ye wolden weene?
Insofar as my skill will stretch.	As ferforth as that my konnyng wol strecche.
And also the falseness of that other wretch,	And eek the falsnesse of that oother wrecche,
To tell thy lack of prudence and thy folly,	To tellen thyn unwit and thy folye,
Unhappy man, right now I will hasten myself	Unhappy man, anon I wol me hye
That refers to thy ruin,	That refereth to thy confusion,
His cunning deceptions thou canst not flee.	His wily wrenches thou ne mayst nat flee.
Which this fox has destined for thee!	Which that this fox yshapen hath to thee!
In no way art thou aware of the deceit	No thyng ne artow war of the deceite
O unfortunate, completely blind is thy mind,	O gracelees, ful blynd is thy conceite,
Very soon thou shalt be blinded by greed!	With coveitise anon thou shalt be blent!
O hapless priest! O hapless innocent!	O sely preest! O sely innocent!
And of his coming harm he felt nothing.	Ne of his harm comynge he no thyng felte.
This priest knew not with whom he dealt,	Noght wiste this preest with whom that he delte,
God keep us from his false dissimulation!	God kepe us from his false dissymulynge!
Such fiendish thoughts in his heart are fixed --	Swiche feendly thoghtes in his herte impresse --
Who evermore has delight and gladness --	That everemoore delit hath and gladnesse --
In (the deeds of) this canon, root of all treachery,	In this chanoun, roote of al trecherie,
And very soon I will verify it	And that ful soone I wol it verifie
Stinks, as these old wise writers bear witness,	Stynketh, as witnessen thise olde wyse,
Very true it is that such a favor not asked for	Ful sooth it is that swich profred servyse
Lo, how this thief could offer his service!	Loo, how this theef koude his service beede!
Said the canon, "and otherwise God forbid!"	Quod the chanoun, "and ellis God forbeede!"
"At your commandment, sir, truly,"	"At youre comandement, sire, trewely,"
"Yes," said the priest, "yes, sir, and will you so?	"Ye," quod the preest, "ye, sire, and wol ye so?
That I will do a masterful work before I go."	That I wol doon a maistrie er I go."
Pay cl,ose attention; you shall well see by eye	Taketh good heede; ye shul wel seen at ye
How I know how to to work in alchemy.	How I kan werken in philosophie.
I will teach you fully the manner	I wol yow teche pleynly the manere
I will show you, and if you want to learn,	I wol yow shewe, and if yow list to leere,
Something with which to repay your kindness	Somwhat to quyte with youre kyndenesse
And shown to me such great courtesy,	And kithed to me so greet gentillesse,
Since you have been so goodly unto me,	Syn ye so goodlich han been unto me,
Nor did I ever intend falsehood in my heart.	Ne nevere falshede in myn herte I mente.
For gold or silver that he lent to me,	For gold ne silver that he to me lente,
That there was never man yet suffered evil	That ther was nevere man yet yvele apayd
I thank God, and rightly it may be said,	God thanke I, and in good tyme be it sayd,
Believe this is as true as your Creed.	Bileveth this as siker as your Crede.
Into my grave, and God forbid it be otherwise.	Into my grave, and ellis God forbede.
Until that day in which I shall creep	Unto that day in which that I shal crepe
My pledged word is a thing that I will always keep	Trouthe is a thyng that I wol evere kepe
Nay, that would be a thing completely without precedent.	Nay, that were thyng yfallen al of newe.
To such a man I can never say no."	To swich a man I kan never seye nay."
That in no way will he fail to pay on his assigned day:	That in no wise he breke wole his day;
When he is so true, of such character	Whan he so trewe is of condicioun
Or whatever thing if it were in my possession,	Or what thyng were in my possessioun,
To lend a man a noble, or two, or three,	To lene a man a noble, or two, or thre,
"Certainly," said he, "in no way does it annoy me	"Certes," quod he, "no thyng anoyeth me
For which this priest was wonderfully glad and happy.	Wherof this preest was wonder glad and fayn.
And to the priest he gave back his gold,	And to the preest he took his gold agayn,
And at the third day brought his money,	And at the thridde day broghte his moneye,
And this canon thanked him many times,	And this chanoun hym thanked ofte sithe,
This priest gave him a mark, and that very quickly,	This preest hym took a marc, and that as swithe,
The next day have me hanged by the neck!"	Another day do hange me by the hals!"
And if it so be that thou find me false,	And if so be that thow me fynde fals,
And at my assigned day I will repay it to thee.	And at my day I wol it quiten thee.
"Loan me a mark," said he, "for only three days,	"Leene me a marc," quod he, "but dayes three,
Of gold, and he would pay it back to him again.	Of gold, and he wolde quite it hym ageyn.
Beseeching him to lend him a certain amount	Bisechynge hym to lene hym a certeyn
Unto this priest's chamber, where he stayed,	Unto this preestes chambre, wher he lay,
Who brought this priest to ruin.	That broghte this preest to confusioun.
And tell forth my tale of the canon	That does not not matter; I will now proceed,
Therof no fors; I wol procede as now,	And he had plenty of spending money.
And spendyng silver hadde he right ynow.	For board nor clothing, went he never so gay,
For bord ne clothyng, wente he never so gaye,	That she would not allow him to pay anything
That she wolde suffre hym no thyng for to paye	Unto the woman, where he took his meals,
Unto the wyf, where as he was at table,	Who was so pleasant and so attentive
Which was so plesaunt and so servysable	Who therein had dwelled many a year,
That therinne dwelled hadde many a yeer,	In London was a priest, a chantry priest,
But in this cas herkneth what I shal seye.	And be not at all displeased, I pray you,
And beeth no thyng displesed, I yow preye,	If the prospect of shame or dishonor can cause any fear.
If shame or los may causen any drede.	Remove him quickly, I advise you,
Remoeveth hym bitymes, I yow rede,	If any Judas be in your convent,
If any Judas in youre covent be,	Save only this, if you will listen to me:
Save oonly this, if ye wol herkne me:	Who were guiltless? Concerning you I say the same,
That giltlees were? By yow I seye the same,	Then why should all the remnant have the blame
Thanne why sholde al the remenant have a blame	There was no traitor but Judas himself.
Ther nas no traytour but Judas hymselve.	That among Christ's twelve apostles
But eek for othere mo; ye woot wel how	This tale was not only told for you,
This tale was nat oonly toold for yow,	But I mean to correct what is amiss.
But to correcten that is mys I mente.	To slander you is not at all my intention,
To sclaundre yow is no thyng myn entente,	Should suffer for one single man's folly.
Sholde rewe o singuleer mannes folye.	And God forbid that a whole company
And God forbede that al a compaignye	There is some scoundrel in every order, by God,
Of every ordre som shrewe is, pardee,	Although my tale be about a canon.
Although that my tale of a chanoun bee.	Do not think that I slander your house,
Ne demeth nat that I sclaundre youre hous,	But worshipful religious canons,
I wol it tellen heere in youre presence.	And if you want to listen to me,
And if yow list to yeve me audience,	Not knowing of his false way of life.
Noght knowynge of his false governaunce.	To seek him and have his acquaintance,
Hym for to seke and have his aqueyntaunce,	And yet men ride and walk very many a mile
And yet men ride and goon ful many a mile	And will, if he may live a while longer;
And wole, if that he lyve may a while;	Very many a man has he beguiled before this,
Ful many a man hath he bigiled er this,	Unless it be a fiend, as he himself is.
But it a feend be, as hymselven is.	That he will make a fool of him right away,
That he wol make hym doten anonright,	When he shall converse with any person,
And speke his wordes in so sly a kynde,	For in his technical terms he will so wrap himself,
For in his termes he wol hym so wynde,	In all this world is not his equal in falsehood,
In al this world of falshede nis his peer,	Though he might live a thousand years.
Though that he myghte lyve a thousand yeer.	No man could write, as I guess,
Ther koude no man writen, as I gesse,	His tricks and his infinite falseness
His sleightes and his infinite falsnesse	Rome, Alexandria, Troy, and any three others.
Rome, Alisaundre, Troye, and othere three.	Though it were as big as was Nineveh,
Thogh it as greet were as was Nynyvee,	Amongst us, who would infect a whole town,
Amonges us, wolde infecte al a toun,	There is a canon regular
By the time that I have made an end of my tale.	By that I of my tale have maad an ende.
That shall you know, before I from you wend,	That shul ye knowe, er that I fro yow wende,
And he that seems truest is a thief.	And he that semeth trewest is a theef.
Is the greatest fool, when it comes to the proof;	Is moost fool, whan it cometh to the preef;
He who seems the wisest, by Jesus,	He that semeth the wiseste, by Jhesus,
Right so, lo, it fares among us:	Right so, lo, fareth it amonges us:
Is not good, whatever men may chatter or cry.	Ne is nat good, what so men clappe or crye.
Nor every apple that is fair to the eye	Ne every appul that is fair at eye
Is not gold, as I have heard said;	Nis nat gold, as that I have herd told;
Every man seems a Solomon.	Every man semeth a Salomon.
And when we are all together every one,	And whan we been togidres everichoon,
And in our madness always we rave.	And in oure madnesse everemoore we rave.
We fail to get that which we want to have,	We faille of that which that we wolden have,
That we conclude always with something gone wrong.	That we concluden everemoore amys.
But, be it hot or cold, I dare say this,	But, be it hoot or coold, I dar seye this,
Another said the fire was too hot --	Another seyde the fir was over-hoot --
There was something wrong, I well know."	Ther was defaute in somwhat, wel I woot."
And unless I do, sirs, let me have the blame.	And but I do, sires, lat me han the wite.
"Quiet!" said my lord, "the next time I will endeavor	"Pees!" quod my lord, "the nexte tyme I wol fonde
And sometime they come safely unto the land."	And somtyme comth it sauf unto the londe."
Sometimes his goods are drowned in the sea,	Somtyme his good is drowned in the see,
Trust me well, in his prosperity.	Trusteth me wel, in his prosperitee.
A merchant, by God, may not endure forever,	A marchant, pardee, may nat ay endure,
We must put our possessions at risk.	Us moste putte oure good in aventure.
Another time it may go well indeed.	Another tyme it may be well ynow.
And though this thing may have turned out badly this time,	And though this thyng myshapped have as now,
Yet is there here, though we have not all.	Yet is ther heere, though that we han nat al.
And sifted, and picked over many a time.	And sifted, and ypiked many a throwe.
And all this rubbish thrown in a sieve	And al this mullok in a syve ythrowe,
And on the floor was cast a canvas,	And on the floor ycast a canevas,
The rubbish was swept in a heap,	The mullok on an heep ysweped was,
Pluck up your hearts and be glad and blithe."	Plukke up youre hertes and beeth glad and blithe."
As our practice is, have the floor quickly swept,	As usage is, lat swepe the floor as swithe,
Be as be may, be you in no way amazed;	Be as be may, be ye no thyng amased;
I am very sure that the pot was cracked.	I am right siker that the pot was crased.
Of these perils I will be wary next time.	Of thise perils I wol be war eftsoone.
But well I know great strife is among us.	But wel I woot greet strif is us among.
I can not tell what it was due to,	I kan nat telle wheron it was long,
That is the cause and none other, as I may prosper!"	That is the cause and oother noon, so thee'ch!"
Because our fire was not made of beech,	By cause oure fir ne was nat maad of beech,
"Nay," said the fourth, "be quiet and listen to me.	"Nay," quod the fourthe, "stynt and herkne me.
It was not tempered as it ought to be."	It was nat tempred as it oghte be."
"Rubbish!" said the third, "you are ignorant and foolish.	"Straw!" quod the thridde, "ye been lewed and nyce.
Then was I afraid, for that was my job.	Thanne was I fered, for that was myn office.
Some said nay, it was due to the blowing --	Somme seyde nay, it was on the blowyng --
Every man chides and considers himsef ill used.	Every man chit and halt hym yvele apayd.
When our pot is broken, as I have said,	Whan that oure pot is broke, as I have sayd,
There is no greater woe, nor greater rancor nor ire.	Nis ther moore wo, ne moore rancour ne ire.
In hell, where he is lord and sire,	In helle, where that he is lord and sire,
I believe he is with us, that same scoundrel!	I trowe he with us be, that ilke shrewe!
Though the fiend does not show himself to our sight,	Though that the feend noght in oure sighte hym shewe,
Some leap into the roof. Without doubt,	Somme lepe into the roof. Withouten doute,
And some are scattered all over the floor;	And somme are scatered al the floor aboute;
Thus have we quickly lost many a pound --	Thus han we lost by tymes many a pound --
They pierce so, and through the wall they go.	They percen so, and thurgh the wal they goon.
Unless they were made of lime and stone;	But if they weren wroght of lym and stoon;
The sides of our vessels can not make resistance to them,	Oure walles mowe nat make hem resistence,
These metals are of such great violence	Thise metals been of so greet violence
The pot shatters, and farewell, all is gone!	The pot tobreketh, and farewel, al is go!
And do you know how? Full often it so happens	And wite ye how? Ful ofte it happeth so
And yet very often he gets in trouble.	And yet ful ofte he renneth in a blame.
Although I know well he has such a reputation;	Algate I woot wel he hath swich a name;
For, as men say, he can work craftily.	For, as men seyn, he kan doon craftily.
My lord tempers them, and no man but he --	My lord hem tempreth, and no man but he --
With a specific quantity of metals,	Of metals with a certeyn quantitee,
Before the pot on the fire is done,	Er that the pot be on the fir ydo,
Pass over this; I go unto my tale.	Passe over this; I go my tale unto.
Lo, thus these folk betray innocence!	Lo, thus this folk bitrayen innocence!
Men would slay them because of their knowledge.	Men wolde hem slee by cause of hir science.
And say that if they were recognized,	And seyn that if that they espied were,
They right away will whisper in his ear,	They right anon wol rownen in his ere,
Why they are clothed so poorly,	Why they been clothed so unthriftily,
If men so desire, this folk they can know.	If that men liste, this folk they knowe may.
Lo, thus by smelling and threadbare array,	Lo, thus by smellyng and threedbare array,
The odor will infect him, trust me.	The savour wole infecte hym, trusteth me.
That though a man be a mile from them,	That though a man from hem a mile be,
Their odor is so like a goat and so intense	Hir savour is so rammyssh and so hoot
For all the world they stink like a goat;	For al the world they stynken as a goot;
Men can know them by the smell of brimstone.	Men may hem knowe by smel of brymstoon.
And evermore, wherever they go,	And everemoore, where that evere they goon,
They can not stop until nothing is left.	They kan nat stynte til no thyng be laft.
And a rough cloak to walk in by daylight,	And a brat to walken inne by daylyght,
Which they might wrap themselves in at night,	Which that they myghte wrappe hem inne a-nyght,
So it seems -- for had they nothing but a sheet	So semeth it -- for nadde they but a sheete
For unto them it is a bitter sweet --	For unto hem it is a bitter sweete --
Yet of that art they can not be satisfied,	Yet of that art they kan nat wexen sadde,
In trust on that, from all that ever they had.	In trust therof, from al that evere they hadde.
That future tense has made men to be separated,	That futur temps hath maad men to dissevere,
I warn you well, it is to keep seeking forever.	I warne yow wel, it is to seken evere.
Such supposing and hope is sharp and hard;	Swich supposyng and hope is sharp and hard;
Supposing ever, though we sorely suffer,	Supposynge evere, though we sore smerte,
Except that good hope creeps into our heart,	But that good hope crepeth in oure herte,
For sorrow of which we almost go mad,	For sorwe of which almoost we wexen wood,
He has made us spend much money,	He hath ymaad us spenden muchel good,
And all our skill, he will not come us to.	And al oure sleighte, he wol nat come us to.
Despite all our craft, when we have all done,	For al oure craft, whan we han al ydo,
But unto God of heaven I make avow,	But unto God of hevene I make avow,
For if we had it, then we would be very well off.	For hadde we hym, thanne were we siker ynow.
Called Elixir, we seek earnestly each one of us;	Elixer clept, we sechen faste echoon;
To raise a fiend, though he look never so rough.	To reyse a feend, al looke he never so rowe.
For, as I believe, I have told you enough	For, as I trowe, I have yow toold ynowe
Of all these names now I will rest myself,	Of alle thise names now wol I me reste,
That is anywhere; therefore, as for the best,	That owher is; wherfore, as for the beste,
To tell all would be longer than any large book	To tellen al wolde passen any bible
Oils, cleansings, and fusible metal --	Oilles, ablucions, and metal fusible --
And also of their hardening;	And also of hire induracioun;
And of the softening of materials,	And of bodies mollificacioun,
Of acidic waters, and of metal filings,	Of watres corosif, and of lymaille,
This is to say, they fail, both of the two.	This is to seyn, they faillen bothe two.
Equally well, when they are all done;	Ylike wel, whan they han al ydo;
Conclude in transmutation	Concluden in multiplicacioun
For both of the two, by my salvation,	For bothe two, by my savacioun,
In fact, he shall find it all the same.	As in effect, he shal fynde it al oon.
And know he book learning or know he none,	And konne he letterure or konne he noon,
Fie! Speak not about that, for it will not be.	Fy! Spek nat therof, for it wol nat bee.
To teach an ignorant man this ingenious skill --	To lerne a lewed man this subtiltee --
All is in vain, and by God, much more.	Al is in veyn, and parde, muchel moore.
Though he sit at his book both day and night	Though he sitte at his book bothe day and nyght
Priest or canon, or any other creature,	Preest or chanoun, or any oother wyght,
Nay, nay, God knows, be he monk or friar,	Nay, nay, God woot, al be he monk or frere,
Is that craft were so easy to learn?	Ascaunce that craft is so light to leere?
Let him appear and become an alchemist.	Lat hym appiere and wexe a philosophre.
And every man that has anything in his strong-box,	And every man that oght hath in his cofre,
Let him come forth and learn to transmute base metals;	Lat hym come forth and lerne multiplie;
Whoever desires to make public his folly,	Whoso that listeth outen his folie,
He shall lose; of that have I no doubt.	He lese shal; therof have I no doute.
He shall have no wealth that can be enough for him,	He shal no good han that hym may suffise,
Whoever will exercise this cursed craft,	This cursed craft whoso wole excercise,
And Venus copper, by my father's kin!	And Venus coper, by my fader kyn!
Saturn lead, and Jupiter is tin,	Saturnus leed, and Juppiter is tyn,
Mars iron, Mercury we call quicksilver,	Mars iren, Mercurie quyksilver we clepe,
Sun is gold, and Moon silver we say,	Sol gold is, and Luna silver we insist,
The seven metals also, lo, hear them now:	The bodyes sevene eek, lo, hem heere anoon:
Sal ammoniac, and the fourth brimstone.	Sal armonyak, and the ferthe brymstoon.
The second orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), the third, indeed,	The seconde orpyment, the thridde, ywis,
By order, as often I heard my lord name them.	By ordre, as ofte I herde my lord hem nevene.
The four spirits and the seven metals	The foure spirites and the bodies sevene,
I will tell you, as it was taught also to me,	I wol yow telle, as was me taught also,
Our casting molds, crucibles for testing, and many more.	Oure yngottes, testes, and many mo.
Our fusion by heat and fermentation,	Oure cementyng and fermentacioun,
And of turning our silver to a yellow color,	And of oure silver citrinacioun,
And also of forming a compound of our materials,	And eek of oure materes encorporyng,
Arsenic, and soaking our materials,	Resalgar, and oure materes enbibyng,
Of tartar, crystallized alum, yeast, unfermented malt, and argol,	Of tartre, alum glas, berme, wort, and argoille,
And burned materials and solidified;	And combust materes and coagulat;
Potassium nitrate, alkali, and purified salt,	Sal tartre, alkaly, and sal preparat,
And various sorts of fires made of wood and coal;	And diverse fires maad of wode and cole;
Waxed (waterproofed) packets, saltpeter, sulphuric acid,	Cered pokkets, sal peter, vitriole,
Various powders, ashes, dung, piss, and clay,	Poudres diverse, asshes, donge, pisse, and cley,
Unslaked lime, chalk, and white of an egg,	Unslekked lym, chalk, and gleyre of an ey,
And of whitening by liquids;	And of watres albificacioun;
Also our furnace for reducing substances to powder,	Oure fourneys eek of calcinacioun,
To bring about our purpose, if we can;	To brynge aboute oure purpos, if we may;
And other such things, if I wanted to tarry;	And othere swiche, if that me liste tarie;
Such as agrimony, valerian, and moonwort,	As egremoyne, valerian, and lunarie,
And herbs could I tell also many a one,	And herbes koude I telle eek many oon,
Arsenic, sal ammoniac, and brimstone;	Arsenyk, sal armonyak, and brymstoon;
Liquids that cause reddening, and bull's gall,	Watres rubifiyng, and boles galle,
There ia no need to list them all --	Nat nedeth it for to reherce hem alle --
And other such things, very expensive at the price of a leek --	And othere swiche, deere ynough a leek --
Vessels for distilling and alembics also,	Cucurbites and alambikes eek,
Vials, crucibles, and sublimation vessels,	Violes, crosletz, and sublymatories,
And various vessels made of clay and glass,	And sondry vessels maad of erthe and glas,
Such as armenian bol (red clay), verdigris (copper acetate), borax,	As boole armonyak, verdegrees, boras,
Though I can not set them in their proper categories:	Thogh I ne kan nat sette hem in hir kynde:
Yet will I tell them as they come to mind,	Yet wol I telle hem as they come to mynde,
Because I am an unlearned man,	By cause that I am a lewed man,
Though I can not list them in their proper order,	Though I by ordre hem nat reherce kan,
That pertains unto our craft.	That is unto oure craft apertenyng.
There is also very many another thing	Ther is also ful many another thyng
Which we spent upon it, is lost also.	Is lost also, which we upon it laye.
For all our labor and travail is lost;	For lost is al oure labour and travaille;
Can in any way help us in our working,	Mowe in oure werkyng no thyng us availle,
Nor our materials that remain fixed in the pot,	Ne oure materes that lyen al fix adoun,
Also neither our spirit's vaporization,	Ne eek oure spirites ascencioun,
Nothing helps us; our labor is in vain.	Noght helpeth us; oure labour is in veyn.
A certain number of ounces of each of these --	Of ech of thise of ounces a certeyn --
Our litharge (lead monoxide) ground also on the porphyry mortar,	Oure grounden litarge eek on the porfurie,
Our orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), and purified mercury,	Oure orpyment and sublymed mercurie,
Despite all our tricks we can not succeed.	For alle oure sleightes we kan nat conclude.
And in blending and reducing to powder	And in amalgamyng and calcenyng
That we had in purifying our materials,	That we hadde in oure matires sublymyng,
Which was made, and of the care and woe	Which that was maad, and of the care and wo
And of the slow fir, and fast also,	And of the esy fir, and smart also,
So that not a bit of the air could pass out;	That of the eyr myghte passe out nothyng;
And sealing of the pot and glasses	And of the pot and glasses enlutyng
And of many other things which were there;	And of muche oother thyng which that ther was;
And well covered with a lamp-shaped vessel of glass;	And wel ycovered with a lampe of glas;
Before these powders that I speak of here;	Biforn thise poudres that I speke of heer;
And how all is put in an earthen pot,	And in an erthen pot how put is al,
That are ground into very fine powder;	That into poudre grounden been ful smal;
Of orpiment (arsenic trisulfide), burned bones, iron flakes,	Of orpyment, brent bones, iren squames,
And busy myself to tell you the names	And bisye me to telle yow the names
Of silver, or some other quantity --	Of silver, or som oother quantitee --
As on five or six ounces, it may well be,	As on fyve or sixe ounces, may wel be,
Of the things that we work upon --	Of thynges whiche that we werche upon --
Why should I tell each proportion	What sholde I tellen ech proporcion
I blow the fire until my heart faints.	I blowe the fir til that myn herte feynte.
Our mysterious craft, we seem wonderfully wise,	Oure elvysshe craft, we semen wonder wise,
When we are where we shall exercise	Whan we been there as we shul exercise
No matter about that; I will speak of our work.	Of that no charge; I wol speke of oure werk.
Thus was I once taught by a clerk.	Thus was I ones lerned of a clerk.
To have their fellows in pain and hardship.	To have hir felawes in peyne and disese.
For unto scoundrels it is joy and ease	For unto shrewes joye it is and ese
To lose their possessions as he himself has done.	To lesen hir good as he hymself hath do.
Then he incites other folk to that,	Thanne he exciteth oother folk therto,
Has lost his own possessions in this dangerous business,	Hath lost his owene good thurgh jupartye,
But empty his purse and make his wits thin.	But empte his purs and make his wittes thynne.
For so help me God, he shall not profit thereby,	For so helpe me God, therby shal he nat wynne,
If he continue, I consider his prosperity done for.	If he continue, I holde his thrift ydo.
Whatever sort of man that applies himself to that,	What maner man that casteth hym therto,
Let every man be warned by me forever!	Lat every man be war by me for evere!
That while I live I shall never repay it.	That whil I lyve I shal it quite nevere.
For gold that I have borrowed, truly,	Of gold that I have borwed, trewely,
And yet by this I am so indebted	And yet I am endetted so therby
That I have no possessions, wherever I fare;	That I have no good, wher that evere I fare;
Lo, how profitable it is to transute metals!	Lo, which avantage is to multiplie!
And by my work yet my eye is bleared.	And of my swynk yet blered is myn ye.
Whoever uses it (that art), sorely shall he rue! --	Whoso it useth, soore shal he rewe! --
Now is it pale and of a leaden hue --	Now is it wan and of a leden hewe --
And whereas my color was both fresh and red,	And wher my colour was bothe fressh and reed,
Now may I wear a hose upon my head;	Now may I were an hose upon myn heed;
Of clothing and of other splendid furnishings,	Of clothyng and of oother good array,
Where I was accustomed to be right fresh and gay	Ther I was wont to be right fressh and gay
And, God knows, so have many more than I.	And, God woot, so hath many mo than I.
And as to his science I am never the nearer (to success).	And of his science am I never the neer.
With this Canon I have dwelt seven years,	With this Chanoun I dwelt have seven yeer,
Prima Pars	Prima Pars
Here begins the Canon's Yeoman's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Chanouns Yeman his Tale.
Here ends the Prologue of the Canon's Yeoman's Tale.	Heere endeth the Prologe of the Chanouns Yemannes Tale .
Such things as what I know, I will declare.	Swich thyng as that I knowe, I wol declare.
Since my lord is gone, I will not spare;	Syn that my lord is goon, I wol nat spare;
But nonetheless you desire that I tell part.	But nathelees yow wol I tellen part.
To tell all that belongs to that art!	To tellen al that longeth to that art!
I could never leave it in any way.	I koude nevere leve it in no wise.
For all my sorrow, labor, and mischief,	For al my sorwe, labour, and meschief,
And yet, for all my pain and all my grief,	And yet, for al my smert and al my grief,
That feel I well, whatever any man says.	That feele I wel, what so any man seith.
For it is serious (not game) to me, by my faith;	For it is ernest to me, by my feith;
Before he dies, may he have sorrow and shame!	Er that he dye, sorwe have he and shame!
He who brought me first unto that game,	He that me broghte first unto that game,
For penny nor for pound, I promise you.	For peny ne for pound, I yow biheete.
For never hereafter will I meet with him	For nevere heerafter wol I with hym meete
Right now I will tell all that I know.	Al that I kan anon now wol I telle.
"Ah!" said the Yeoman, "here shall arise some amusement;	"A!" quod the Yeman, "heere shal arise game;
He fled away for true sorrow and shame.	He fledde awey for verray sorwe and shame.
But that his Yeoman would tell his secrets,	But his Yeman wolde telle his pryvetee,
And when this Canon saw it would not be,	And whan this Chanon saugh it wolde nat bee,
"In faith," said he, "I do (reckon him) but little any more."	"In feith," quod he, "namoore I do but lyte."
Reckon all his threatening not worth a fraction of a penny!"	Of al his thretyng rekke nat a myte!"
"Yes," said our Host, "tell on, whataever may happen.	"Ye," quod oure Hoost, "telle on, what so bityde.
And also revealest what thou shouldest hide."	And eek discoverest that thou sholdest hyde."
For if thou do, thou shalt dearly pay for it.	For if thou do, thou shalt it deere abye.
"Hold thou thy peace and speak no more words,	"Hoold thou thy pees and spek no wordes mo,
And thus he said unto his Yeoman then:	And thus he seyde unto his Yeman tho:
To his Yeoman, to hear all his speech.	To his Yeman, to herknen al his sawe.
That was the cause he did draw himself so near	That was the cause he gan so ny hym drawe
Believes every thing is spoken about him, indeed.	Demeth alle thyng be spoke of hym, ywis.
For Cato says that he who is guilty	For Catoun seith that he that gilty is
Of men's speech ever had this Canon.	Of mennes speche evere hadde this Chanoun.
Which this Yeoman spoke, for suspicion	Which this Yeman spak, for suspecioun
While this Yeoman was thus in his talking,	Whil this Yeman was thus in his talkyng,
It will make us beggars at the last."	It wole us maken beggers atte laste."
Overtake it, it slides away so fast.	It overtake, it slit awey so faste.
We can not, although we had sworn it,	We mowen nat, although we hadden it sworn,
But that knowledge is so far ahead of us,	But that science is so fer us biforn,
To do it, and after it we grope.	It for to doon, and after it we grope.
Yet is it false, but always we have good hope	Yet is it fals, but ay we han good hope
That of one pound we could make two.	That of a pound we koude make tweye.
And make them believe, at the very least,	And make hem wenen, at the leeste weye,
And borrow gold, be it a pound or two,	And borwe gold, be it a pound or two,
To many folk we do delusion,	To muchel folk we doon illusioun,
For ever we lack our desired conclusion.	For evere we lakken oure conclusioun.
And despite all that, we fail to achieve our desire,	And for al that we faille of oure desir,
We blunder ever and stare in the fire,	We blondren evere and pouren in the fir,
But to work hard and to learn to transmute metals.	But swynke soore and lerne multiplie.
I am not accustomed to peer in any mirror,	I am nat wont in no mirour to prie,
That it has changed my color, I believe.	That it hath chaunged my colour, I trowe.
I am so used to blow in the fire	I am so used in the fyr to blowe
Why art thou so discolored in thy face?"	Why artow so discoloured of thy face?"
"Now," said our Host, "yet let me talk to thee.	"Now," quod oure Hoost, "yit lat me talke to the.
So fare we, if I shall say the truth."	So faren we, if I shal seye the sothe."
Like those who dare not show their presence;	As they that dar nat shewen hir presence;
Hold their private fearful residence,	Holden hir pryvee fereful residence,
Where these robbers and these thieves by nature	Whereas thise robbours and thise theves by kynde
"Lurking in hiding places and in dead-end alleys,	"Lurkynge in hernes and in lanes blynde,
"In the outskirts of a town," said he,	"In the suburbes of a toun," quod he,
Where do you dwell, if it can be told?"	Where dwelle ye, if it to telle be?"
Tell how he does, I pray thee heartily,	Telle how he dooth, I pray thee hertely,
"Since thou knowest of the cunning of thy lord,	"Syn of the konnyng of thy lord thow woost,
"That does not matter, good Yeoman," said our Host;	"Ther-of no fors, good Yeman," quod oure Hoost;
God amend it! I can tell you no more."	God it amende! I kan sey yow namoore."
So does my lord, and that sorely grieves me;	So dooth my lord, and that me greveth soore;
Very often he happens to misuse it.	Ful oft hym happeth to mysusen it.
For when a man has too great a wit,	For whan a man hath over-greet a wit,
Therefore in that I hold him ignorant and foolish.	Wherfore in that I holde hym lewed and nyce.
Right, as clerks say; it is a vice.	Aright, as clerkes seyn; it is a vice.
He is too wise, in faith, as I believe.	He is to wys, in feith, as I bileeve.
And therefore keep it secret, I pray you.)	And therfore keepe it secree, I yow preye.)
(But I will not publicly acknowledge what I say,	(But I wol nat avowe that I seye,
So help me God, for he shall never prosper!	God help me so, for he shal nevere thee!
"Why?" said this Yeoman, "why do you ask me?	"Why?" quod this Yeman, "wherto axe ye me?
Tell me that, and of that I beseech thee."	Telle me that, and that I thee biseche."
If his deeds accord with thy speech?	If that his dede accorde with thy speche?
And has the power to buy better cloth,	And is of power bettre clooth to beye,
Why is thy lord so slovenly, I pray thee,	Why is thy lord so sluttissh, I the preye,
Because in fact, to him, as I may go (I swear),	As in effect, to hym, so moot I go,
His outer garment is not worth a fraction of a penny,	His overslope nys nat worth a myte,
That he cares so little for his own self-respect.	That of his worshipe rekketh he so lite.
Because of which men should reverence him,	By cause of which men sholde hym reverence,
Since thy lord is of such great prudence,	Syn that thy lord is of so heigh prudence,
This thing is wonderfully marvelous to me,	This thyng is wonder merveillous to me,
Unto our Host, he said, "Bless you!	Unto oure Hoost, he seyde, "Benedicitee!
And when this Yeoman had this tale told	And whan this Yeman hadde this tale ytold
And pave it all with silver and with gold."	And pave it al of silver and of gold."
Until we come to Canterbury town,	Til that we come to Caunterbury toun,
That all this ground on which we are riding,	That al this ground on which we been ridyng,
And yet somewhat I help in his work --	And somwhat helpe I yet to his wirkyng --
But all his craft you can not know from me,	But al his craft ye may nat wite at me,
"I say, my lord knows such esoteric science --	"I seye, my lord kan swich subtilitee --
Host, I will show you something of his craft.	Hoost, of his craft somwhat I wol yow shewe.
Said this Yeoman, "and in few words,	Seyde this Yeman, "and in wordes fewe,
"Nay, he is greater than a clerk, indeed,"	"Nay, he is gretter than a clerk, ywis,"
Is he a clerk, or not? Tell what he is."	Is he a clerk, or noon? Telle what he is."
I tell you indeed, he is a remarkable man."	I warne yow wel, he is a passyng man."
He is a man of great discretion;	He is a man of heigh discrecioun;
All that I have in my possession.	Al that I have in my possessioun.
For great riches, I dare wager on that	For muchel good, I dar leye in balaunce
You would not forgo his acquaintance	Ye wolde nat forgoon his aqueyntaunce
If you knew him, it would be to your advantage.	If ye hym knewe, it wolde be for youre prow.
Despite how modestly he rides amongst you,	As hoomly as he rit amonges yow,
To bring about, unless they learn it from him.	To brynge aboute, but they of hym it leere.
Which would be very hard for any one who is here	Which were ful hard for any that is heere
He knows how to work, and that in a variety of ways.	He koude werke, and that in sondry wise.
You would wonder how well and craftily	Ye wolde wondre how wel and craftily
If you knew him as well as do I,	And ye hym knewe as wel as do I,
More than enough; also, sir, trust me,	Nat but ynough; also, sire, trusteth me,
He knows about mirth and also about jollity	He kan of murthe and eek of jolitee
"Who, sir? My lord? Yes, yes, without lie,	"Who, sire? My lord? Ye, ye, withouten lye,
With which he may gladden this company?"	With which he glade may this compaignye?"
Can he in any way tell a merry tale or two,	Can he oght telle a myrie tale or tweye,
He is very cheerful also, I dare wager!	He is ful jocunde also, dar I leye!
Then said our Host, "for certainly it would seem	Thanne seyde oure Hoost, "for certein it wolde seme
"Friend, for thy telling him God give thee good luck,"	"Freend, for thy warnyng God yeve thee good chaunce,"
For his pleasure; he loves sociability."	For his desport; he loveth daliaunce."
Who is very eager to ride with you	Which that to ryden with yow is ful fayn
And told my lord here and my sovereign,	And warned heer my lord and my soverayn,
I saw you ride out of your hostelry,	I saugh yow ryde out of youre hostelrie,
And said, "Sirs, just now in the morning time	And seyde, "Sires, now in the morwe-tyde
His yeoman also was full of courtesy,	His yeman eek was ful of curteisye,
To ride in this merry company."	To riden in this myrie compaignye."
Fast have I spurred," said he, "for your sake,	Faste have I priked," quod he, "for youre sake,
"God save," said he, "this jolly company!	"God save," quod he, "this joly compaignye!
And when he was come to us, he began to cry out,	And whan that he was come, he gan to crye,
Full of the herbs plantain and pellitory.	Were ful of plantayne and of paritorie.
His forehead dripped like a still	His forheed dropped as a stillatorie
But what a joy it was to see him sweat!	But it was joye for to seen hym swete!
For sweat and to keep his head from heat.	For swoot and for to keep his heed from heete.
A burdock-leaf he had under his hood	A clote-leef he hadde under his hood
He had always spurred as if he were crazy.	He hadde ay priked lik as he were wood.
His hat hung at his back down by a strap,	His hat heeng at his bak doun by a laas,
I judged him to be some sort of canon.	I demed hym som chanoun for to be.
For which, when I had long thought about it,	For which, whan I hadde longe avysed me,
How his cloak was sewn to his hood,	How that his cloke was sowed to his hood,
What he was until I understood	What that he was til that I understood
And in my heart I began to wonder	And in myn herte wondren I bigan
All lightly clad for summer rode this worthy man,	Al light for somer rood this worthy man,
It seemed that he carried little gear.	It semed that he caried lite array.
A double bag on his crupper lay;	A male tweyfoold on his croper lay;
About the collar stood the foam very high;	Aboute the peytrel stood the foom ful hye;
So sweated that it could hardly move.	So swatte that unnethe myghte it gon.
The horse also that his yeoman rode upon	The hors eek that his yeman rood upon
It seemed as if he had spurred hard for three miles.	It semed as he had priked miles three.
So sweated that it was a wonder to see;	So swatte that it wonder was to see;
His riding horse, that was all dapple gray,	His hakeney, that was al pomely grys,
And underneath that he had a white surplice.	And undernethe he hadde a whyt surplys.
A man who was clothed in black clothes,	A man that clothed was in clothes blake,
At Boghtoun under Blee overtook us	At Boghtoun under Blee us gan atake
When the life of Saint Cecile was ended,	Whan ended was the lyf of Seinte Cecile,
But thing that will not be, let it be still."	But thyng that wol nat be, lat it be stille."
For my purposes, if you knew my will;	As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;
This is a fine tale for this occasion,	This is a gentil tale for the nones,
My wife at home had heard this legend once!	My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!
I would rather than have a barrel of ale	Me were levere than a barel ale
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,	Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,
When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,	This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,
Behold, the merry words of the Host.	Bihoold the murye words of the Host
Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,	Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,
To get thee friends always work hard;	To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;
If thou be ugly, be lavish in thy expenditures;	If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;
Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;	Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;
If thou be fair, where folk are present,	If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,
And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.	And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.
In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,	In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,
Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.	Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.
The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence	The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence
Fear them not; do them no reverence,	Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,
Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.	Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.
Be fierce as is a tiger yonder in India;	Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;
And slender wives, feeble in battle,	And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,
Suffer not that men do offense to you.	Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.
Since you are strong as is a great camel;	Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;
You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,	Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,
Since it may work to the benefit of all.	For commune profit sith it may availle.
Imprint well this lesson in your mind,	Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,
Be not fooled because of your innocence,	Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,
But ever answers in reply.	But evere answereth at the countretaille.
Follow Echo, who holds no silence,	Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,
Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!	Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!
As of patient and kind Griselda,	As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,
To write about you a story of such marvel	To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille
Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness	Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence
Let no humility nail down your tongue,	Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,
O noble wives, full of great prudence,	O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,
His wife's patience trusting to find	His wyves pacience in trust to fynde
No wedded man so bold be to test	No wedded man so hardy be t'assaille
For which I cry in the hearing of all	For which I crie in open audience
And both together buried in Italy;	And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;
Griselda is dead, and also her patience,	Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,
Hear my song that says in this manner:	Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:
And let us stint of serious matter.	And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.
Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;	Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;
I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,	I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,
Whose life and all her sect may God maintain	Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene
For which here, for the love of the Wife of Bath --	For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --
It would rather break in two than bend.	It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.
With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,	With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,
The gold of them has now been so badly debased	The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes
For if they were put to such tests,	For if that they were put to swiche assayes,
In all the town Griseldas three or two;	In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;
It would be very difficult to find now-a-days	It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes
But one word, lords, hear before I go:	But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:
For my purposes, if you knew my will;	As to my purpos, wiste ye my wille;
This is a fine tale for this occasion,	This is a gentil tale for the nones,
My wife at home had heard this legend once!	My wyf at hoom had herd this legende ones!
I would rather than have a barrel of ale	Me were levere than a barel ale
Our Host said, and swore, "By God's bones,	Oure Hooste seyde, and swoor, "By Goddes bones,
When ended was the tale of this worthy Clerk,	This worthy Clerk, whan ended was his tale,
Bihoold the murye words of the Host	And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
And lat hym care, and wepe, and wrynge, and waille!	Be ever in behavior as light as a leaf on a linden tree,
Be ay of chiere as light as leef on lynde,	To get thee friends always work hard;
If thou be foul, be fre of thy dispence;	Show thou thy visage and thy apparel;
Shewe thou thy visage and thyn apparaille;	If thou be fair, where folk are present,
If thou be fair, ther folk been in presence,	And thou shalt make him cower as does a quail.
And thou shalt make hym couche as doth a quaille.	In jealousy I advise also that thou bind him,
In jalousie I rede eek thou hym bynde,	Shall pierce his breast and also his neck-guard.
Shal perce his brest and eek his aventaille.	The arrows of thy spiteful eloquence
The arwes of thy crabbed eloquence	For though thy husband be armed in mail,
For though thyn housbonde armed be in maille,	Fear them not; do them no reverence,
Ne dreed hem nat; doth hem no reverence,	Ever wag your tongues like a windmill, I you advise.
Beth egre as is a tygre yond in Ynde;	And slender wives, feeble in battle,
And sklendre wyves, fieble as in bataille,	Suffer not that men do offense to you.
Ne suffreth nat that men yow doon offense.	Since you are strong as is a great camel;
Syn ye be strong as is a greet camaille;	You arch-wives, stand ready for battle,
Ye archewyves, stondeth at defense,	Since it may work to the benefit of all.
For commune profit sith it may availle.	Imprint well this lesson in your mind,
Emprenteth wel this lessoun in youre mynde,	But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
But sharply taak on yow the governaille.	Be not fooled because of your innocence,
Beth nat bidaffed for youre innocence,	But ever answers in reply.
Folweth Ekko, that holdeth no silence,	Lest Chichevache swallow you in her entrails!
Lest Chichevache yow swelwe in hire entraille!	As of patient and kind Griselda,
As of Grisildis pacient and kynde,	To write about you a story of such marvel
To write of yow a storie of swich mervaille	Nor let any clerk have cause or eagerness
Ne lat no clerk have cause or diligence	Let no humility nail down your tongue,
Lat noon humylitee youre tonge naille,	O noble wives, full of great prudence,
O noble wyves, ful of heigh prudence,	Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
Grisildis, for in certein he shal faille.	His wife's patience trusting to find
His wyves pacience in trust to fynde	No wedded man so bold be to test
For which I crie in open audience	And both together buried in Italy;
And bothe atones buryed in Ytaille;	Griselda is dead, and also her patience,
Grisilde is deed, and eek hire pacience,	Chaucer's envoy.
Lenvoy de Chaucer.	Hear my song that says in this manner:
Herkneth my song that seith in this manere:	And let us stint of serious matter.
And lat us stynte of ernestful matere.	Say you a song to make you happy, I believe;
Seyn yow a song to glade yow, I wene;	I will with lusty heart, fresh and vigorous,
I wol with lusty herte, fressh and grene,	In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
In heigh maistrie, and elles were it scathe --	Whose life and all her sect may God maintain
For which heere, for the Wyves love of Bathe --	It would rather break in two than bend.
It wolde rather breste a-two than plye.	With brass, that though the coin be fair to look at,
With bras, that thogh the coyne be fair at ye,	The gold of them has now been so badly debased
The gold of hem hath now so badde alayes	For if they were put to such tests,
For if that they were put to swiche assayes,	In all the town Griseldas three or two;
In al a toun Grisildis thre or two;	It would be very difficult to find now-a-days
It were ful hard to fynde now-a-dayes	But one word, lords, hear before I go:
But o word, lordynges, herkneth er I go:	Let us then live in virtuous forbearance.
Lat us thanne lyve in vertuous suffraunce.	And for our best is all his governance.
Er we were born, knew al oure freletee;	Not to know our will, for certainly he,
Nat for to knowe oure wyl, for certes he,	Full often to be beaten in various ways;
Ful ofte to be bete in sondry wise;	With sharp whips of adversity
With sharpe scourges of adversitee	And permits us, for our own good
And suffreth us, as for oure excercise,	He tests folk all the time, it is no doubt,
He preeveth folk al day, it is no drede,	As says Saint James, if you his epistle read;
As seith Seint Jame, if ye his pistel rede;	But he tests no man that he redeemed,
But he ne tempteth no man that he boghte,	For it is very reasonable that he test what he made.
For greet skile is he preeve that he wroghte.	Receive with a good will all that God sends us;
Unto a mortal man, wel moore us oghte	For since a woman was so patient
For sith a womman was so pacient	This story, which with high style he composes.
This storie, which with heigh stile he enditeth.	As was Griselda; therefore Petrarch writes
As was Grisilde; therfore Petrak writeth	Should be constant in adversity
Sholde be constant in adversitee	But so that every person, in his station in life,
But for that every wight, in his degree,	For it would be intolerable, though they would (want to),
For it were inportable, though they wolde,	Follow Griselda in humility,
Folwen Grisilde as in humylitee,	This story is said not so that wives should
This storie is seyd nat for that wyves sholde	And listen to what this author says concerning this (tale).
As it hath been in olde tymes yoore,	This world is not so strong, there is no denying,
This world is nat so strong, it is no nay,	Although he put not his wife in great tests.
Al putte he nat his wyf in greet assay.	And fortunate was also in marriage,
And fortunat was eek in mariage,	In rest and peace, after his father's day,
In reste and pees, after his fader day,	His son succeeds in his heritage
His sone succedeth in his heritage	Until the soul out of his body creeps.
Til that the soule out of his body crepeth.	His wife's father in his court he keeps,
His wyves fader in his court he kepeth,	Of all Italy; and then in peace and rest
Of al Ytaille; and thanne in pees and reste	Unto a lord, one of the worthiest
And richely his doghter maryed he	Live these two in peace and in quiet,
Lyven thise two in concord and in reste,	Full many a year in high prosperity
Ful many a yeer in heigh prosperitee	Than was the revel of their marriage.
Than was the revel of hire mariage.	This feast was, and greater of cost,
This feste was, and gretter of costage,	For more splendid in every man's sight
For moore solempne in every mannes syght	Until in the sky shone the stars' light.
Til on the welkne shoon the sterres lyght.	This day in mirth and revel to spend
This day in murthe and revel to dispende	For every man and woman does his might
For every man and womman dooth his myght	Thus has this pitiful day a blissful end,
And ther she was honured as hire oghte.	Upon her head, they into hall her brought,
Upon hire heed, they into halle hire broghte,	With a crown of many a rich stone
With a coroune of many a riche stoon	And in a cloth of gold that brightly shone,
And in a clooth of gold that brighte shoon,	And strip her out of her crude clothing,
And strepen hire out of hire rude array,	Have taken her and into chamber they go,
Han taken hire and into chambre gon,	These ladies, when they see their time,
Thise ladyes, whan that they hir tyme say,	Between them two, now they are met together.
Bitwixe hem two, now they been met yfeere.	That it was delightful to see the happiness
That it was deyntee for to seen the cheere	Walter strives so faithfully to please her
Til she hath caught agayn hire contenaunce.	And every person makes joy and festivity for her
And every wight hire joye and feeste maketh	She rises up, disconcerted, from her trance,
She riseth up, abaysed, from hire traunce,	Walter comforts her and her sorrow relieves;
Walter hire gladeth and hire sorwe slaketh;	Hardly about her might they remain.
Unnethe abouten hire myghte they abyde.	Down ran of them that stood beside her;
Doun ran of hem that stooden hire bisyde;	O many a tear on many a pitiful face
O many a teere on many a pitous face	The children from her arm they did tear away.
The children from hire arm they gonne arace.	That with great effort and great difficulty
That with greet sleighte and greet difficultee	Her children two, when she embraced them,
And in hire swough so sadly holdeth she	All suddenly she fell down to the ground.
Al sodeynly she swapte adoun to grounde.	Has had you protected" -- and in that same moment
Hath doon yow kept" -- and in that same stounde	And your benign father tenderly
And youre benyngne fader tendrely	Had eaten you; but God of his mercy
Hadde eten yow; but God of his mercy	That cruel hounds or some foul animal pests
That crueel houndes or som foul vermyne	Your woeful mother truly believed
Youre woful mooder wende stedfastly	"O tender, o dear, o my young children!
"O tendre, o deere, o yonge children myne!	Death does not matter, nor when my spirit may pass (away)!
No fors of deeth, ne whan my spirit pace!	Since I stand in your love and in your grace,
Now rekke I nevere to been deed right heere;	"That you have saved for me my children dear!
"That ye han saved me my children deere!	"Great thanks, lord, may God repay it to you," said she,
"Grauntmercy, lord, God thanke it yow," quod she,	Her swooning, and her humble voice to hear!
Hir swownyng, and hire humble voys to heere!	O what a pathetic thing it was to see
O which a pitous thyng it was to se	She bathed both their visage and their hair.
She bathed bothe hire visage and hire heeres.	Full like a mother, with her salt tears
Ful lyk a mooder, with hire salte teeres	Embraces them, and tenderly kissing
Embraceth hem, and tendrely kissynge	And in her arms, pitifully weeping,
And in hire armes, pitously wepynge,	She calls both her young children to her,
For pitous joye, and after hire swownynge	When she heard this, down she falls in a swoon
Whan she this herde, aswowne doun she falleth	Until I knew thy perseverence and all thy will."
Til I thy purpos knewe and al thy wille."	But to keep them secretly and quietly,
But for to kepe hem pryvely and stille,	And not to slay my children -- God forbid! --
And nat to sleen my children -- God forbeede! --	But to test in thee thy womanhood,
But for t'assaye in thee thy wommanheede,	For no malice, nor for no cruelty,
For no malice, ne for no crueltee,	I declare to them clearly that I have done this deed
I warne hem wel that I have doon this deede	"And folk that otherwise have said of me,
"And folk that ootherweys han seyd of me,	That thou hast lost any of thy children two.
Taak hem agayn, for now maystow nat seye	At Bologna I have kept them secretly;
At Boloigne have I kept hem prively;	Thou bore him in thy body truly.
Thou bare hym in thy body trewely.	Shall be my heir, as I have ever intended;
Shal be myn heir, as I have ay disposed;	To be my wife; that other truly
To be my wyf; that oother feithfully	"This is thy daughter, which thou hast supposed
"This is thy doghter, which thou hast supposed	Nor ever had, as God my soul may save!
Ne nevere hadde, as God my soule save!	Thou art my wife, and none other I have,
Thou art my wyf, ne noon oother I have,	"Griselda," said he, "by God, who for us died,
"Grisilde," quod he, "by God, that for us deyde,	Until out of her bewilderment she suddenly awoke.
She ferde as she had stert out of a sleep,	She heard not what thing he said to her;
She herde nat what thyng he to hire seyde;	And she for amazement took of it no notice;
And she for wonder took of it no keep;	And took her in arms and kissed her.
And hire in armes took and gan hire kesse.	Now I know, dear wife, thy steadfastness" --
Now knowe I, dere wyf, thy stedfastnesse" --	In great estate and in poverty.
In greet estaat and povreliche arrayed.	As well as ever woman was, tested,
As wel as evere womman was, assayed,	I have thy faith and thy goodness,
I have thy feith and thy benyngnytee,	"Be now no more frightened nor displeased.
"Be now namoore agast ne yvele apayed.	"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he;
To rewen upon hire wyfly stedfastnesse.	This stern marquis inclined his heart
This sturdy markys gan his herte dresse	Continuing ever her innocence in every way,
Continuynge evere hire innocence overal,	And she ever steadfast and constant as a wall,
And she ay sad and constant as a wal,	And he so often had done to her offence,
And he so ofte had doon to hire offence,	Her glad expression, and no malice at all,
Hir glade chiere, and no malice at al,	And when this Walter saw her patience,
And whan this Walter saugh hire pacience,	As could a poorly reared creature."
As koude a povre fostred creature."	She could not endure adversity
She koude nat adversitee endure	More tenderly, and, as I believe,
For she is fostred in hire norissynge	This tender maiden, as you have done to others;
This tendre mayden, as ye han doon mo;	That you not distress with any tormenting
That ye ne prikke with no tormentynge	"One thing I beseech you, and warn also,
"O thyng biseke I yow, and warne also,	Pleasure enough unto your lives' end.
Plesance ynogh unto youre lyves ende.	And so I hope that he will to you send
And so hope I that he wol to yow sende	I pray to God to give her prosperity;
I prey to God yeve hire prosperitee;	I never saw so fair a one as she.
A fairer saugh I nevere noon than she.	"Right well," said she, "my lord; for, in good faith,
"Right wel," quod she, "my lord; for, in good fey,	"How do you like my wife and her beauty?"
"Grisilde," quod he, as it were in his pley,	Griselda, as she was busy in his hall.
Grisilde, as she was bisy in his halle.	To sit down to dinner, he called
To sitten doun to mete, he gan to calle	But at the last, when these lords went
But atte laste, whan that thise lordes wende	So well that no man could praise her more highly.
So wel that no man koude hir pris amende.	With all her heart, in full benign intention,
With al hir herte, in ful benyngne entente,	This maid and also her brother to commend
This mayde and eek hir brother to commende	In all this mean while she did not cease
In al this meene while she ne stente	And deservedly they praise her prudence.
And worthily they preisen hire prudence.	And knew how to do such honor and reverence,
That in so povre array was for to see,	But ever they wonder who she might be
But ay they wondren what she myghte bee	That no man perceives any fault,
That no defaute no man aperceyveth,	And so skillfully, each according to his rank,
And so konnyngly, everich in his degree,	With such glad manner his guests she receives,
With so glad chiere his gestes she receyveth,	And after that carries on her work.
And after that dooth forth hire bisynesse.	With other folk to greet the marchioness,
With oother folk to greete the markysesse,	But with glad manner to the gate is went
But with glad cheere to the yate is went	Though it was crude and also somewhat ragged;
Thogh it were rude and somdeel eek torent;	Not at all was she ashamed of her clothing,
That to the feeste was apertinent.	Full busy was Griselda in every thing
Ful bisy was Grisilde in every thyng	And tell her constancy and her diligence.
And telle hir constance and hir bisynesse.	But to Griselda again will I address myself,
But to Grisilde agayn wol I me dresse,	No more of this make I now mention,
Namoore of this make I now mencioun,	To have a new lady of their town.
To han a newe lady of hir toun.	For they were glad, right for the novelty,
For they were glad, right for the noveltee,	When the people gazed up and down,
Whan that the peple gazed up and doun,	Thus said serious folk in that city,
Thus seyden sadde folk in that citee,	A full great fool is he that believes in you."
Youre doom is fals, youre constance yvele preeveth;	Always full of chattering, not worth a penny!
Ay ful of clappyng, deere ynogh a jane!	For like the moon ever you wax and wane!
For lyk the moone ay wexe ye and wane!	Delighting ever in rumor that is new,
Delitynge evere in rumbul that is newe,	Ever undiscerning and changing like a weather vane!
Ay undiscreet and chaungynge as a fane!	"O stormy people! Inconstant and ever untrue!
"O stormy peple! Unsad and evere untrewe!	Commending now the marquis's governance.
Commendynge now the markys governaunce.	That the people take pleasure in seeing them,
That hem to seen the peple hath caught plesaunce,	Her brother also so fair was of visage
Hir brother eek so fair was of visage	And more pleasing, because of her high lineage.
And fairer fruyt bitwene hem sholde falle,	Than is Griselda, and more tender of age,
Than is Grisilde, and moore tendre of age,	For she is fairer, as they all decide,
For she is fairer, as they deemen alle,	To change his wife, for it was for the best.
To chaunge his wyf, for it was for the beste.	That Walter was no fool, though he desired
That Walter was no fool, thogh that hym leste	And then for the first time amongst themselves they say
And thanne at erst amonges hem they seye	Of their accoutrements, so rich in appearance;
Of hire array, so richely biseye;	For which the people ran to see the sight
For which the peple ran to seen the sighte	Who with him brought these noble children two,
That with hym broghte thise noble children tweye,	About mid-morning did this earl alight,
Hath every chambre arrayed and his halle.	And she, the most willing to serve of all,
And she, the mooste servysable of alle,	To hasten themselves, and fast sweep and dust;
To hasten hem, and faste swepe and shake;	Praying the chambermaids, for God's sake,
Preyynge the chambereres, for Goddes sake,	And took pains to do all that she could,
And peyned hire to doon al that she myghte,	And to set tables, and make beds;
And tables for to sette, and beddes make;	And with that word she began to prepare the house,
And with that word she gan the hous to dighte,	To love you best with all my true will."
To love yow best with al my trewe entente."	Shall the spirit within my heart cease
Ne shal the goost withinne myn herte stente	Nor never, for any happiness nor any woe,
Withouten feyntyng, and shal everemo;	You to serve and please in accord with my rank
Yow for to serve and plese in my degree	"To do your wishes, but I desire also
"To doon youre lust, but I desire also	"Not only, lord, I am glad," said she,
"Nat oonly, lord, that I am glad," quod she,	Do thou thy duty at least."
Do thou thy devoir at the leeste weye."	Though thy dress be bad and in poor condition,
Thogh thyn array be badde and yvel biseye,	Thou knowest also of old all my desires;
Thou knowest eek of old al my plesaunce;	That thine be the supervision of all this business.
That thyn were al swich manere governaunce.	According to my wishes, and therefore I would like
After my lust, and therfore wolde I fayn	The chambers to put in order
"I have no wommen suffisaunt, certayn,	And great pleasure, as I can best arrange.
And heigh plesaunce, as I kan best devyse.	Have his due respect, in seating and service
Have his estaat, in sittyng and servyse	And also that every person, according to his rank
And eek that every wight in his degree	As it is possible in my house to be,
As it possible is in myn hous to be,	Be received to-morrow as royally
Received be to-morwe as roially	That this maiden, who shall be wedded to me,
This mayden, that shal wedded been to me,	"Griselda," said he, "my will is completely
"Grisilde," quod he, "my wyl is outrely	And reverently and wisely she greeted him.
And reverently and wisely she hym grette.	Came at his command, and on her knees set herself,
Nat with no swollen thoght in hire corage,	And she with humble heart and glad visage,
And she with humble herte and glad visage,	For that same innocent poor Griselda;
For thilke sely povre Grisildis;	Before this earl was come, sent his messenger
Er that this erl was come, sente his message	The marquis, who arranged and knew all this,
The markys, which that shoop and knew al this,	Such a noble array in all West Lombardy.
So noble array in al West Lumbardye.	That never was there seen with man's eye
That nevere was ther seyn with mannes ye	He brought with him, in such pomp and riches
He with hym broghte, in swich pompe and richesse	Was made known also that a new marchioness
Was kouth eek that a newe markysesse	And to the people's ears, one and all,
Of which the fame up sprang to moore and lesse,	From Bologna is this Earl of Panyk come,
Fro Boloigne is this Erl of Panyk come,	As women are, unless it happened recently.
As wommen been, but it be falle of newe.	As woman can, nor can be half so true
As womman kan, ne kan been half so trewe	There can no man in humility acquit himself
Ther kan no man in humblesse hym acquite	Though clerks praise women but a little,
Though clerkes preise wommen but a lite,	Especially of men, but in truth,
Namely of men, but as in soothfastnesse,	As clerks, when they want, know well how to write,
As clerkes, whan hem list, konne wel endite,	Men speak of Job, and mostly for his humility,
Men speke of Job, and moost for his humblesse,	And to her husband ever meek and stable.
Discreet and pridelees, ay honurable,	But full of patient goodness,
But ful of pacient benyngnytee,	No pomp, nor outward appearance of royalty,
No pompe, no semblant of roialtee,	No tender mouth, no self-indulgent feelings,
No tendre mouth, noon herte delicaat,	Her spirit was ever in full humility;
Hire goost was evere in pleyn humylitee;	No wonder is, for in her great estate
No wonder is, for in hire grete estaat	Had she, according to her countenance.
Ne hadde she, as by hire contenaunce.	Nor of her high estate no remembrance
Ne of hire heighe estaat no remembraunce	She showed that to her was done offence;
Ne shewed she that hire was doon offence;	Before the folk, nor also in their absence,
That neither by hire wordes ne hire face,	Dwells this flower of womanly patience,
Dwelleth this flour of wyfly pacience,	Thus with her father for a certain space of time
Thus with hire fader for a certeyn space	By many days than at her marriage.
By dayes fele than at hire mariage.	For coarse was the cloth, and more of age
For rude was the clooth, and moore of age	But on her body he could not bring it,
But on hire body myghte he it nat brynge,	He covered her, full sorrowfully weeping.
He covered hire, ful sorwefully wepynge.	And with her old coat, insofar as it could
And with hire olde coote, as it myghte be	For he by noise of folk knew her coming,
For he by noyse of folk knew hire comynge,	To meet his daughter hastily goes he,
And voyden hire as soone as ever he myghte.	To his rank so low to stoop,
To his estaat so lowe for t'alighte,	He would think it was a degradation
Hym wolde thynke it were a disparage	That when the lord had fulfilled his desires,
That whan the lord fulfild hadde his corage,	For ever he believed, since it began,
For evere he demed, sith that it bigan,	Was ever in suspicion of her marriage;
Was evere in suspect of hir mariage;	For doubtless this old poor man
For out of doute this olde poure man	Shaped him to be a living creature.
Shoop hym to been a lyves creature.	Curses the day and time that Nature
Curseth the day and tyme that Nature	Her father, who heard this news straightway,
Ne in this tyme word ne spak she noon.	But she from weeping kept her eyes dry,
But she fro wepyng kepte hire eyen dreye,	And Fortune ever they curse as they go;
And Fortune ay they cursen as they goon;	The folk follow her, weeping on their way,
The folk hire folwe, wepynge in hir weye,	Toward her father's house forth is she gone.
Toward hir fadre hous forth is she fare.	And in her smock, with head and foot all bare,
And in hir smok, with heed and foot al bare,	Before the folk she strips herself,
Biforn the folk hirselven strepeth she,	But went his way, for grief and for pity.
But wente his wey, for routhe and for pitee.	But scarcely that same word he spoke,
But wel unnethes thilke word he spak,	Let it be (there) still, and bear it forth with thee."
"The smok," quod he, "that thou hast on thy bak,	Of you, my own lord, lest I you grieve."
Of yow, myn owene lord, lest I yow greve."	Who was your wife. And here take I my leave
That was youre wyf. And heer take I my leeve	That I with it may cover the womb of her
That I therwith may wrye the wombe of here	Only such a smock as I was accustomed to wear,
But swich a smok as I was wont to were,	Condescend to give me, as my recompense,
As voucheth sauf to yeve me, to my meede,	Which I brought, and nothing I bear back,
Which that I broghte, and noght agayn I bere,	"Therefore, in recompense for my maidenhead,
"Wherfore, in gerdon of my maydenhede,	I was your wife, though I unworthy were.
I was youre wyf, though I unworthy weere.	Remember, my own lord so dear,
Lat me nat lyk a worm go by the weye.	Be seen all bare; therefore I you pray,
Be seyn al bare; wherfore I yow preye,	Should before the people, in my walking,
Sholde biforn the peple, in my walkyng,	That that same womb in which your children lay
That thilke wombe in which youre children leye	"You could not do so shameful a thing,
"Ye koude nat doon so dishonest a thyng,	That I should go without a smock out of your palace.
That I smoklees out of youre paleys wente.	But yet I hope it be not your intention
But yet I hope it be nat youre entente	All your pleasure will I eagerly follow;
Al youre plesance wol I folwen fayn;	"I came, and naked must I return.
"I cam, and naked moot I turne agayn.	Naked out of my father's house," said she,
Inwith youre chambre, dar I saufly sayn.	"The remnant of your jewels ready are
"The remenant of youre jueles redy be	And also your wedding ring, for evermore.
And eek your weddyng ryng, for everemore.	And here in return your clothing I restore,
And heere agayn your clothyng I restoore,	But faith, and nakedness, and maidenhead;
But feith, and nakednesse, and maydenhede;	To you I brought nothing else, beyond doubt,
To yow broghte I noght elles, out of drede,	And had me richly clad, by your grace.
And richely me cladden, of youre grace.	You had me stripped out of my poor clothing,
Ye dide me streepe out of my povre weede,	"My lord, you know that in my father's place
"My lord, ye woot that in my fadres place	That I gave you my heart whole heartedly.
That evere in word or werk I shal repente	Even if I were to die miserably, it shall not be
To dyen in the cas, it shal nat bee	But certainly, lord, for no adversity,
But certes, lord, for noon adversitee,	When love is old it is not the same as when it was new.
Love is noght oold as whan that it is newe.	For in fact it is proven by me --
For in effect it preeved is on me --	"But sooth is said -- always I find it true,
"But sooth is seyd -- algate I fynde it trewe,	The day that our marriage was made!
The day that maked was oure mariage!	You seemed by your speech and your visage
Ye semed by youre speche and youre visage	O good God! How gentle and how kind
O goode God! How gentil and how kynde	Which to me were hard to find now.
It were my wrecched clothes, nothyng faire,	As I first brought, it is well in my mind
As I first broghte, it is wel in my mynde	"But inasmuch as you offer me such dowry
"But ther as ye me profre swich dowaire	That I shall go, I will go when you please.
That I shal goon, I wol goon whan yow leste.	"Who once was all my heart's peace,
"That whilom weren al myn hertes reste,	For since it pleases you, my lord," said she,
For sith it liketh yow, my lord," quod shee,	In which I was accustomed to be blissful.
In which that I was blisful wont to bee.	For I will gladly yield her my place,
For I wol gladly yelden hire my place,	Grant you happiness and prosperity!
So graunte yow wele and prosperitee!	"And of your new wife God of his grace
Another man to housbonde or to make!	God forbid such a lord's wife to take
God shilde swich a lordes wyf to take	And am your true wife, there is no doubt,
And am youre trewe wyf, it is no drede,	For since I gave to you my maidenhead,
For sith I yaf to yow my maydenhede,	A widow clean in body, heart, and all.
A wydwe clene in body, herte, and al.	Until I be dead I will lead my life there,
Til I be deed my lyf ther wol I lede,	"Where I was fostered as a child full small,
"Ther I was fostred of a child ful smal,	And with him dwell unto my life's end.
And with hym dwelle unto my lyves ende.	Unto my father gladly will I go,
Unto my fader gladly wol I wende,	To reward you for it; there is no more to say.
That thonke I God and yow, to whom I preye	Where I was not worthy to be,
Where as I was noght worthy for to bee,	Have maintained me in honor and nobility,
Han holden me in honour and nobleye,	"That you so long of your benignity
"That ye so longe of youre benignitee	Above every worldly creature.
Aboven every worldly creature.	And ever shall, while my life may endure,
And evere shal, whil that my lyf may dure,	But humble servant to your worthiness,
But humble servant to youre worthynesse,	I never considered myself lady nor mistress,
I nevere heeld me lady ne mistresse,	And as surely as he my soul may gladden --
And also wysly he my soule glaade --	The high God I take for my witness,
"And in this hous, ther ye me lady maade --	To be your wife, no, nor your chambermaid.
To be youre wyf, no, ne youre chamberere.	I considered myself never worthy in any way
I ne heeld me nevere digne in no manere	Make comparison; it cannot be denied.
Maken comparison; it is no nay.	And my poverty no person can nor may
And my poverte no wight kan ne may	How between your magnificence
How that bitwixen youre magnificence	"My lord," said she, "I know, and knew always,
"My lord," quod she, "I woot, and wiste alway,	And she in reply answered in patience:
And she agayn answerde in pacience:	The stroke of Fortune or of chance."
The strook of Fortune or of aventure."	With tranquil heart I advise you to endure
"No man may alwey han prosperitee.	Return to your father's house," said he;
Retourneth to youre fadres hous," quod he;	Take it back; I grant it of my grace.
Taak it agayn; I graunte it of my grace.	And that dowry that you brought me,
And thilke dowere that ye broghten me,	"Be strong of heart, and vacate her place immediately;
"Be strong of herte, and voyde anon hir place;	My new wife is coming by the way.
My newe wyf is comynge by the weye.	And truly thus much I will say to you:
And trewely thus muche I wol yow seye:	Consents to it -- that dare I assert --
Consenteth it -- that dar I undertake --	And also the pope, to quench rancor,
And eek the pope, rancour for to slake,	Another wife, and complain day by day;
My peple me constreyneth for to take	"I can not do as every plowman may.
"I may nat doon as every plowman may.	There is great servitude in various ways.
Ther is greet servitute in sondry wyse.	That in great lordship, if I judge rightly,
That in greet lordshipe, if I wel avyse,	But now know I in true certainty
But now knowe I in verray soothfastnesse	Not for your lineage, nor for your riches;
Noght for youre lynage, ne for youre richesse;	As for your truth and for your obedience
As for youre trouthe and for youre obeisance,	To have you as my wife for your goodness,
To han yow to my wyf for youre goodnesse,	"Certainly, Griselda, I had enough pleasure
"Certes, Grisilde, I hadde ynogh plesance	Full rudely has said to her this speech:
He on a day in open audience	If she were as steadfast as before,
If that she were as stidefast as bifoore,	Fully to have experience and knowledge
Fully to han experience and loore	To the utmost test of her heart,
To the outtreste preeve of hir corage,	This marquis, yet his wife to test more
This markys, yet his wyf to tempte moore	Meanwhile, in accord with his wicked usage,
Among al this, after his wikke usage,	From day to day they ride on their way.
Fro day to day they ryden in hir wey.	Toward Saluces directing their journey,
Toward Saluces shapynge hir journey,	And thus in great nobility and with a glad manner,
And thus in greet noblesse and with glad cheere,	Adorned also full handsomely in his manner.
Her brother, who was seven years of age,	Hir brother, which that seven yeer was of age,
This lovely maid, (her clothing) full of bright gems;	This fresshe mayde, ful of gemmes cleere;
Adorned was in preparation for her marriage	Arrayed was toward hir mariage
Her young brother riding beside her.	Hir yonge brother ridynge hire bisyde.
In rich array, this maiden to guide,	In riche array, this mayden for to gyde,
Toward Saluce, and lords many a one	Toward Saluce, and lordes many oon
For at the set day he on his way is gone	For at day set he on his wey is goon
And as this earl was asked, so did he;	And as this erl was preyed, so dide he;
Unto the Marquis of Saluce immediately.	Unto the Markys of Saluce anon.
Should tell whose children they were,	Sholde nat telle whos children that they were,
That he to no one, though men would inquire,	That he to no wight, though men wolde enquere,
But one thing he him prayed earnestly,	But o thyng he hym preyede outrely,
In a noble public display.	In honurable estaat al openly.
To bring home again his two children	To bryngen hoom agayn his children two
Wedded his sister, prayed he specifically	Wedded his suster, preyde he specially
To the Earl of Panyk, who had then	To the Erl of Panyk, which that hadde tho
And secretly he sent it to Bologna.	And secreely he to Boloigne it sente.
A letter, in which he reveals his intention,	A lettre, in which he sheweth his entente,
But shortly if this story I tell shall,	But shortly if this storie I tellen shal,
As her true worldly source of satisfaction.	As to hire verray worldly suffisance.
To whom she was given, heart and all,	To whom that she was yeven herte and al,
Enduring ever his desire and his pleasure,	Abidynge evere his lust and his plesance,
To endure all the adversity of Fortune,	The adversitee of Fortune al t'endure,
Disposed was, this humble creature,	Disposed was, this humble creature,
But she, continuously steadfast for evermore,	But she, ylike sad for everemo,
I believe that her heart was very woeful.	I deeme that hire herte was ful wo.
But when these tidings came to Griselda,	But whan thise tidynges came to Grisildis,
The ignorant people, as it no wonder is,	The rude peple, as it no wonder is,
Which they have published widely.	The which they han publiced atte fulle.
Between his people and him; thus said the bull,	Bitwixe his peple and hym; thus seyde the bulle,
To stint rancor and dissension	To stynte rancour and dissencion
As by the pope's dispensation,	As by the popes dispensacion,
That he has permission to leave his first wife,	That he hath leve his firste wyf to lete,
The pope's bulls, making mention	The popes bulles, makynge mencion
I say, he commanded they should counterfeit	I seye, he bad they sholde countrefete
Commanded him to wed another, if he pleased.	Bad hym to wedde another, if hym leste.
As to his cruel purpose may suffice --	As to his crueel purpos may suffyse --
Commanding them such papal bulls to devise	Comaundynge hem swiche bulles to devyse
Informed of his real purpose, sent his messenger,	Enformed of his wyl, sente his message,
He to the court of Rome, (which was) in a cunning manner	He to the court of Rome, in subtil wyse
When his daughter was twelve years of age,	Whan that his doghter twelve yeer was of age,
To test his wife was set all his intention.	To tempte his wyf was set al his entente.
Would he of his cruel purpose desist;	He of his crueel purpos nolde stente;
But nevertheless, not for any reason,	But nathelees, for ernest ne for game,
To be a murderer is (to have) a hateful reputation;	To been a mordrere is an hateful name;
Had loved him well, the disgrace of his bad reputation	Hadde loved hym wel, the sclaundre of his diffame
For which, whereas his people before this	For which, where as his peple therbifore
There came no word but that they were murdered.	Ther cam no word but that they mordred were.
No wonder is, for to the people's ear	No wonder is, for to the peples ere
Such grumbling was among them unanimously.	Swich murmur was among hem comunly.
Has murdered both his children secretly.	Hath mordred bothe his children prively.
Because he had wedded a poor woman,	For he a povre womman wedded hadde,
That of a cruel heart he wickedly,	That of a crueel herte he wikkedly,
The ill fame of Walter spread often and wide,	The sclaundre of Walter ofte and wyde spradde,
A wife, concerning herself, nothing should	A wyf, as of hirself, nothing ne sholde
She proved good; for no worldly discomfort	She shewed wel, for no worldly unreste
And, God be thanked, all fell for the best.	And, God be thanked, al fil for the beste.
The same desire was her pleasure also.	The same lust was hire plesance also.
There was but one will, for as Walter desired,	Ther nas but o wyl, for as Walter leste,
For which it seemed thus: that of them two	For which it semed thus: that of hem two
She was to him in love, and more attentive.	She was to hym in love, and moore penyble.
The more true, if it were possible,	The moore trewe, if that it were possible,
And ever the further that she was in age,	And ay the forther that she was in age,
But never could he find variation.	But nevere koude he fynde variance.
That she to him was changed in heart,	That she to hym was changed of corage,
He watches to see if by word or countenance	He waiteth if by word or contenance
To test his wife as he was first disposed.	To tempte his wyf as he was first disposed.
Right so this marquis has firmly decided	Right so this markys fulliche hath purposed
They will not from that original plan desist.	They wol nat of that firste purpos slake.
But, right as if they were bound to that stake,	But, right as they were bounden to that stake,
They can not refrain from their intention,	They kan nat stynte of hire entencion,
That when they have a certain purpose taken,	That whan they have a certein purpos take,
And he continuing ever in cruelty?	And he continuynge evere in sturdinesse?
To test her wifehood and her steadfastness,	To preeve hir wyfhod and hir stedefastnesse,
What could a cruel husband more devise	What koude a sturdy housbonde moore devyse
If these tests might not suffice?	If thise assayes myghte nat suffise?
But now I would like to ask of women	But now of wommen wolde I axen fayn
She loved her children best in every way.	She loved hir children best in every wyse.
But well he knew that next to himself, certainly,	But wel he knew that next hymself, certayn,
That she had suffered this with calm manner.	That she hadde suffred this with sad visage.
And out of malice, or for hard heart,	And of malice, or for crueel corage,
That she perfectly loved her children,	That parfitly hir children loved she,
Had not truly known before this	Ne hadde soothly knowen therbifoore
Upon her patience, and if he	Upon hir pacience, and if that he
This marquis wondered, more and more,	This markys wondred, evere lenger the moore,
But to Bologna he tenderly brought it.	But to Boloigne he tendrely it broghte.
He went his way, as if he cared nothing about it,	He wente his wey, as hym no thyng ne roghte,
But she no answer of him might have.	But she noon answere of hym myghte have.
From birds and from beasts to save.	Fro foweles and fro beestes for to save.
His tender limbs, pleasing in appearance,	His tendre lymes, delicaat to sighte,
Save this, she prayed him that, if he could,	Save this, she preyede hym that, if he myghte,
But kissed her son, and afterwards it blessed;	But kiste hir sone, and after gan it blesse;
That she made no appearance of sadness,	That she no chiere maade of hevynesse,
And continually so patient was she	And evere in oon so pacient was she
Has seized her son, that was full of beauty.	Hath hent hire sone, that ful was of beautee.
Or worse, if one can worse imagine --	Or worse, if men worse kan devyse --
That he her daughter seized, right so he --	That he hire doghter caughte, right so he --
This ugly sergeant, in the same manner	This ugly sergeant, in the same wyse
But to his heart it was full great pleasure.	But to his herte it was ful greet plesance.
In patience suffer all this treatment;	In pacience suffre al this array;
His eyes two, and wonders that she can	His eyen two, and wondreth that she may
The constancy of his wife, he cast down	The constance of his wyf, he caste adoun
Unto your love." And when this marquis saw	Unto youre love." And whan this markys say
"Death can not make any comparison (is nothing compared)	"Deth may noght make no comparisoun
Right gladly would I die, to please you.	Right gladly wolde I dyen, yow to plese.
For if I knew that my death would do you ease,	For wiste I that my deeth wolde do yow ese,
All your pleasure (whatever you wish) firm and stable I hold;	Al youre plesance ferme and stable I holde;
But now I know your desire, and what you want,	But now I woot youre lust, and what ye wolde,
To know your will, before you told me your desire,	Youre wyl to knowe, er ye youre lust me tolde,
"And certainly, if I had foreknowledge	"And certes, if I hadde prescience
Do your pleasure; I will obey your desire.	Dooth youre plesaunce; I wol youre lust obeye.
And took your clothing; wherefore I you pray,	And took youre clothyng; wherfore I yow preye,
"Left I my will and all my liberty,	"Lefte I my wyl and al my libertee,
When I first came to you, right so," said she,	Whan I first cam to yow, right so," quod she,
For as I left at home all my clothing,	For as I lefte at hoom al my clothyng,
Right as you desire; ask no advice from me.	Right as yow list; axeth no reed at me.
"You are our lord; do with your own thing	"Ye been oure lord; dooth with youre owene thyng
I have not had any part of children two	I have noght had no part of children tweyne
At your commandment, this is to say.	At youre comandement, this is to sayn.
Though my daughter and my son be slain --	Though that my doughter and my sone be slayn --
But as you desire. It does not grieve me at all,	But as yow list. Naught greveth me at al,
I want nothing, nor will not want any thing, certainly,	I wol no thyng, ne nyl no thyng, certayn,
"I have," said she, "said thus, and ever shall:	"I have," quod she, "seyd thus, and evere shal:
Be patient, and for that I pray you."	Beth pacient, and therof I yow preye."
For any woe should break out in a passion;	Out of youreself for no wo sholde outreye;
This I warn you, so that you not suddenly	This warne I yow, that ye nat sodeynly
As I dealt with his sister by night,	As I his suster servede by nyghte,
Therefore I am firmly resolved,	Wherfore I am disposed outrely,
"I would live in peace, if I could;	"I wolde lyve in pees, if that I myghte;
Though they speak not plainly in my hearing.	Though they nat pleyn speke in myn audience.
For certainly I dread such opinion,	For certeinly I drede swich sentence,
Well ought I of such grumbling take heed,	Wel oughte I of swich murmur taken heede,
Such words say my people, no doubt.	Swiche wordes seith my peple, out of drede.
And be our lord, for we have no other.'	And been oure lord, for oother have we noon.'
Then shall the blood of Janicle succeed	Thanne shal the blood of Janicle succede
That it well nigh has destroyed my heart.	That it wel ny destroyed hath myn herte.
For to my ears comes the voice so sharply	For to myne eres comth the voys so smerte
The grumbling slays my heart and my feelings,	The murmur sleeth myn herte and my corage,
Now is it worse than ever in all our lives.	Now is it worse than evere in al oure age.
And especially since my son is born,	And namely sith my sone yboren is,
My people are unhappy with our marriage;	My peple sikly berth oure mariage;
"Wife," said this marquis, "you have heard before this	"Wyf," quod this markys, "ye han herd er this
When they find a patient creature.	Whan that they fynde a pacient creature.
But wedded men know no moderation,	But wedded men ne knowe no mesure,
To test his wife yet again, if he can.	To tempte his wyf yet ofter, if he may.
This marquis caught yet another desire	This markys caughte yet another lest
Of his nurse weaned, on one day	Departed of his norice, on a day
When it was two years old, and from the breast	Whan it was two yeer old, and fro the brest
Was for this child, and God they thank and praise.	Was for this child, and God they thanke and herye.
Not only he but all his country merry	Nat oonly he but al his contree merye
And when folk told it to his father,	And whan that folk it to his fader tolde,
Very gracious and beautiful in appearance.	Ful gracious and fair for to biholde.
A male child she bore by this Walter,	A knave child she bar by this Walter,
In this condition there are passed four years	In this estaat ther passed been foure yeer
Mentioned she, in earnest nor in jest (in any way).	Ne nempned she, in ernest nor in game.
Was seen in her, and never her daughter's name	Was seyn in hire, ne nevere hir doghter name
No external sign, for any adversity,	Noon accident, for noon adversitee,
Nor of her daughter not a word spoke she.	Ne of hir doghter noght a word spak she.
Was she to him in every sort of way;	Was she to hym in every maner wyse;
And also in love, as she was accustomed to be,	And eek in love, as she was wont to be,
As glad, as humble, as diligent in service,	As glad, as humble, as bisy in servyse,
Anything but always the same, alike steadfast and kind.	But evere in oon ylike sad and kynde.
Or by her word perceive, if she	Or by hire word aperceyve, that she
If by his wife's appearance he might see,	If by his wyves cheere he myghte se,
For now he goes very intently considering	For now gooth he ful faste ymaginyng
But to this marquis we now return.	But to this markys now retourne we.
The sergeant goes, and has fulfilled this order;	The sergeant gooth, and hath fulfild this thyng;
From every person, for anything that may happen.	From every wight, for oght that may bityde.
And whose child that it was he commanded her to hide	And whos child that it was he bad hire hyde
This child to nurture in all noble manners;	This child to fostre in alle gentillesse;
Beseeching her to do her best	Bisekynge hire to doon hire bisynesse
Who at that very time was countess of Panik,	That thilke tyme of Panik was countesse,
But at Bologna to his sister dear,	But at Boloigne to his suster deere,
Nor whence he came, nor whither he went;	Ne whenne he cam, ne whider that he wente;
No man should know of his intention,	That no man sholde knowe of his entente,
But, upon pain of having his head cut off,	But, upon peyne his heed of for to swappe,
And carry it in a box or in a folded cloth;	And carie it in a cofre or in a lappe;
With every care tenderly,	With alle circumstances tendrely,
Should this child softly wind and wrap (in a blanket),	Sholde this child softe wynde and wrappe,
And commanded this sergeant that he secretly	And bad this sergeant that he pryvely
But nevertheless his purpose held he still,	But nathelees his purpos heeld he stille,
Somewhat this lord had pity in his manner,	Somwhat this lord hadde routhe in his manere,
And presents him with his daughter dear.	And hym presenteth with his doghter deere.
He told him in detail, in short and plain (words),	He tolde hym point for point, in short and pleyn,
And of Griselda's words and her manner	And of Grisildis wordes and hire cheere
This sergeant came unto his lord again,	This sergeant cam unto his lord ageyn,
But took the child and went upon his way.	But took the child and wente upon his weye.
But he no word will say to that proposal,	But he no word wol to that purpos seye,
That no beasts nor birds tear it to pieces."	That beestes ne no briddes it torace."
That, unless my lord forbad you, at the least	That, but my lord forbad yow, atte leeste
But one thing will I pray you of your grace,	But o thyng wol I prey yow of youre grace,
"Go now," said she, "and do my lord's command;	"Gooth now," quod she, "and dooth my lordes heeste;
"Have here again your little young maid.	"Have heer agayn youre litel yonge mayde.
And to the sergeant meekly she said,	And to the sergeant mekely she sayde,
That she endured all adversity,	That she endured al adversitee,
But nevertheless so firmly steadfast was she	But nathelees so sad stidefast was she
Well might a mother then have cried "alas!"	Wel myghte a mooder thanne han cryd "allas!"
It would have been hard this pitiful situation to see;	It had been hard this reuthe for to se;
For this night shalt thou die for my sake."	For this nyght shaltow dyen for my sake."
Thy soul, little child, I entrust to him,	Thy soule, litel child, I hym bitake,
That for us died upon a cross of wood,	That for us deyde upon a croys of tree,
Of that same Father -- blessed may he be! --	Of thilke Fader -- blessed moote he be! --
But since I have marked thee with the cross	But sith I thee have marked with the croys
"Farewell my child! I shall thee never see.	"Fareweel my child! I shal thee nevere see.
And thus she said in her benign voice,	And thus she seyde in hire benigne voys,
And lulled it, and afterward kissed it.	And lulled it, and after gan it kisse.
With full sad face, and blessed the child,	With ful sad face, and gan the child to blisse,
That she might kiss her child before it died.	That she moste kisse hire child er that it deyde.
As he was a worthy gentle man,	So as he was a worthy gentil man,
And meekly she to the sergeant prayed,	And mekely she to the sergeant preyde,
But at the last she began to speak,	But atte laste to speken she bigan,
Conforming herself to what the marquis pleased.	Conformynge hire to that the markys lyked.
But nevertheless she neither wept nor sighed,	But nathelees she neither weep ne syked,
She thought he would have slain it right then.	She wende he wolde han slawen it right tho.
Alas! Her daughter that she loved so,	Allas! Hir doghter that she loved so,
Suspect the time in which he this began.	Suspect the tyme in which he this bigan.
Suspicious was the bad reputation of this man,	Suspecious was the diffame of this man,
And let this cruel sergeant do his will.	And leet this crueel sergeant doon his wille.
And as a lamb she sits meek and still,	And as a lamb she sitteth meke and stille,
Griselda must suffer all and consent to all,	Grisildis moot al suffre and al consente,
As if he would have slain it before he went.	As though he wolde han slayn it er he wente.
Mercilessly, and made a face	Despitously, and gan a cheere make
And spoke no more, but out the child he seized	And spak namoore, but out the child he hente
"This child I am commanded to take" --	"This child I am comanded for to take" --
And so will I; there is no more to say.	And so wol I; ther is namoore to seye.
They may well be bewailed or complained of,	They mowe wel been biwailled or compleyned,
That lords' commands may not be evaded (by feigning);	That lordes heestes mowe nat been yfeyned;
You are so wise that full well you know	Ye been so wys that ful wel knowe ye
Though I do a thing to which I am constrained.	Though I do thyng to which I am constreyned.
"Madame," he said, "you must forgive it me,	"Madame," he seyde, "ye moote foryeve it me,
Into the chamber he stalked very quietly.	Into the chambre he stalked hym ful stille.
And when this sergeant knew his lord's will,	And whan this sergeant wiste his lordes wille,
The lord knew well that he loved and dreaded him;	The lord knew wel that he hym loved and dradde;
Carry out their orders in evil matters.	Doon execucioun in thynges badde.
Whom he had often found faithful	The which that feithful ofte he founden hadde
A sort of sergeant (policeman) was this confidential servant,	A maner sergeant was this privee man,
Unto a man, and sent him to his wife.	Unto a man, and to his wyf hym sente.
He privately has told all his plan	He prively hath toold al his entente
Soon after this, in a few minutes,	Soone after this, a furlong wey or two,
When he had to go out of the chamber.	Whan that he sholde out of the chambre go.
All sorrowful was his manner and his look,	Al drery was his cheere and his lookyng,
But yet he feigned as if he were not so;	But yet he feyned as he were nat so;
Glad was this marquis of her answer,	Glad was this markys of hire answeryng,
No length of time or death can obliterate this,	No lengthe of tyme or deeth may this deface,
This will is in my heart, and ever shall be;	This wyl is in myn herte, and ay shal be;
Nor dread to lose, save only you.	Ne drede for to leese, save oonly yee.
Nor do I desire to have anything,	Ne I desire no thyng for to have,
Please you that may displease me;	Liken to yow that may displese me;
"There can nothing, as God my soul may save,	"Ther may no thyng, God so my soule save,
Your own thing; do as you will.	Youre owene thyng; werketh after youre wille.
Are entirely yours, and you may save or kill	Been youres al, and ye mowe save or spille
My child and I, with heart-felt obedience,	My child and I, with hertely obeisaunce,
For, as it seemed, she was not aggrieved.	For, as it semed, she was nat agreved.
Neither in word, nor manner, nor countenance,	Neither in word, or chiere, or contenaunce,
When she had heard all this, she changed not	Whan she had herd al this, she noght ameved
That day that our marriage was made."	That day that maked was oure mariage."
That you promised me and swore in your village	That ye me highte and swore in youre village
Show now in your actions your patience,	Shewe now youre pacience in youre werkyng,
"That you assent to me in this matter.	"That ye to me assente as in this thyng.
I will not do anything; but this I desire," said he,	I wol nat doon; but this wol I," quod he,
But nevertheless without your knowledge	But nathelees withoute youre wityng
Not as I would want, but as my people desire.	Nat as I wolde, but as my peple leste.
I must do with thy daughter for the best,	I moot doon with thy doghter for the beste,
I can not be imprudent in this case;	I may nat in this caas be recchelees;
To live my life with them in rest and peace.	To lyve my lyf with hem in reste and pees.
But I desire, as I have done before,	But I desire, as I have doon bifore,
These words have they spoken, doubtless.	Thise wordes han they spoken, doutelees.
"And especially since thy daughter was born	"And namely sith thy doghter was ybore
To thee, that art born in a humble village.	To thee, that born art of a smal village.
To be subjects and be in servitude	For to be subgetz and been in servage
Unto my nobles you are not at all so.	Unto my gentils ye be no thyng so.
And though to me you are beloved and dear,	And though to me that ye be lief and deere,
Into this house, it is not long ago;	Into this hous, it is nat longe ago;
"You know well yourself how you came here	"Ye woot youreself wel how that ye cam heere
There is no person that hears it but we two.	Ther is no wight that hereth it but we tweye.
Take heed of every word that I say to you;	Taak heede of every word that y yow seye;
Despite any present prosperity you must know it yourself.	For any wele ye moot youreselven knowe.
That I took you in a poor, very humble condition,	That I yow took in povre estaat ful lowe,
Requires that you be not forgetful	Maketh yow nat foryetful for to be
"I say, Griselda, this present high social position,	"I seye, Grisilde, this present dignitee,
You have not forgotten that, as I suppose?	Ye have nat that forgeten, as I gesse?
And put you in the condition of high nobility --	And putte yow in estaat of heigh noblesse --
That I took you out of your impoverished situation,	That I yow took out of youre povere array,
And said thus: "Griselda," said he, "that day	And seyde thus: "Grisilde," quod he, "that day
With stern face and with a very troubled manner,	With stierne face and with ful trouble cheere,
He came alone at night, where she lay,	He cam allone a-nyght, ther as she lay,
For which this marquis worked in this manner:	For which this markys wroghte in this manere:
And put her in anguish and in dread.	And putten hire in angwyssh and in drede.
But as for me, I say that it ill befits one	But as for me, I seye that yvele it sit
Though some men praise its ingenuity?	Though som men preise it for a subtil wit?
To test her, and always more and more,	Hire for to tempte, and alwey moore and moore,
And found her always good; why was it needed	And foond hire evere good; what neded it
He had tested her enough before,	He hadde assayed hire ynogh bifore,
Needless, God knows, he intended to frighten her.	Nedelees, God woot, he thoghte hire for t'affraye.
This strange desire to test his wife;	This merveillous desir his wyf t'assaye;
That he could not out of his heart throw	That he ne myghte out of his herte throwe
To test his wife, her constancy to know,	To tempte his wyf, hir sadnesse for to knowe,
When this child had suckled but a short time,	Whan that this child had souked but a throwe,
There happened, as it befalls many times,	Ther fil, as it bifalleth tymes mo,
By likelihood, since she is not barren.	By liklihede, syn she nys nat bareyne.
She may unto a male child attain	She may unto a knave child atteyne
For though a maid child came all before,	For though a mayde child coome al bifore,
Glad was this marquis and the folk for this,	Glad was this markys and the folk therfore,
Although she would rather have given birth to a male child;	Al had hire levere have born a knave child;
Was married, she has borne a daughter,	Was wedded, she a doghter hath ybore,
Not long time after this Griselda	Nat longe tyme after that this Grisild
That she was sent from heaven, as men supposed,	That she from hevene sent was, as men wende,
And judgments of such great justice,	And juggementz of so greet equitee,
Such wise and well considered words had she,	So wise and rype wordes hadde she,
Were wroth, she would bring them to agreement;	Were wrothe, she wolde bryngen hem aton;
If noble men or others of her country	If gentil men or othere of hire contree
Though her husband was absent at the time,	Though that hire housbonde absent were anon,
And wisely bring them all in rest and ease.	And wisely brynge hem alle in reste and ese.
In all that land that she could not alleviate,	In al that land that she ne koude apese,
There was no discord, rancor, nor sadness	Ther nas discord, rancour, ne hevynesse
But also, when the situation required it,	But eek, whan that the cas required it,
Knew all the skills of a housewife's duties,	Koude al the feet of wyfly hoomlinesse,
Not only this Griselda through her wit	Nat oonly this Grisildis thurgh hir wit
A prudent man, and that is seen full seldom.	A prudent man, and that is seyn ful seelde.
Was often virtue hid, the people considered him	Was ofte vertu hid, the peple hym heelde
And because he saw that under low social rank	And for he saugh that under low degree
At home, and to all appearances he had sufficient happiness;	At hoom, and outward grace ynogh had he;
In God's peace lives full easily	In Goddes pees lyveth ful esily
Wedded with beneficial virtue,	Wedded with fortunat honestetee,
Go to Saluce to look upon her.	Goon to Saluce upon hire to biholde.
That men and women, as well young as old,	That men and wommen, as wel yonge as olde,
So spread the fame of her high goodness	So spradde of hire heighe bountee the fame
If one said well, another said the same;	If oon seide wel, another seyde the same;
But also moreover in many a region,	But eek biside in many a regioun,
Was made known the praise of her name,	Publiced was the bountee of hir name,
Not only in the town of Saluces	Noght oonly of Saluces in the toun
That each who looked on her face loved her.	That ech hire lovede that looked on hir face.
And could so the people's heart embrace,	And koude so the peples herte embrace,
And so discreet and fair of eloquence,	And so discreet and fair of eloquence,
Of good characteristics, set in high goodness,	Of thewes goode, yset in heigh bountee,
She was increased in such excellence	She was encressed in swich excellence
For though that she was always virtuous,	For though that evere vertuous was she,
They thought she was another creature.	Hem thoughte she was another creature.
She was daughter, for, by conjecture,	She doghter were, for, as by conjecture,
That to Janicle, of whom I spoke before,	That to Janicle, of which I spak bifore,
They hardly believed -- but dared have sworn --	Unnethe trowed they -- but dorste han swore --
And from her birth knew her year by year,	And from hire birthe knewe hire yeer by yeere,
To every person she is grown so dear	To every wight she woxen is so deere
But nurtured in an emperor's hall.	But norissed in an emperoures halle.
In a peasant's hut or in an ox-stall,	As in a cote or in an oxe-stalle,
That she was born and fed in humble circumstances,	That she was born and fed in rudenesse,
That it seemed not likely	That it ne semed nat by liklynesse
God has such favor sent her of his grace	God hath swich favour sent hire of his grace
I say that to this new marchioness	I seye that to this newe markysesse
And shortly forth this tale to pursue,	And shortly forth this tale for to chace,
In revel, until the sun descended.	In revel, til the sonne gan descende.
With joyful people that led and met her,	With joyful peple that hire ladde and mette,
And to his palace, before he longer delayed,	And to his paleys, er he lenger lette,
Upon a horse, snow-white and with a gentle pace,	Upon an hors, snow-whit and wel amblyng,
Brought for the same purpose, and then set her	Broght for the same cause, and thanne hire sette
This marquis has espoused her with a ring	This markys hath hire spoused with a ryng
When she was translated into such riches.	Whan she translated was in swich richesse.
The hardly people knew her for her beauty	Unnethe the peple hir knew for hire fairnesse
Of her appearance why should I make a long tale?	Of hire array what sholde I make a tale?
And set her garments full of jeweled ornaments of every sort.	And sette hire ful of nowches grete and smale.
Very crudely, and with their elegant fingers	Ful rudely, and with hir fyngres smale
Her hair have they combed, that lay unkempt	Hir heris han they kembd, that lay untressed
From foot to head they have clothed all new.	Fro foot to heed they clothed han al newe.
But nevertheless, this maid bright of hue	But nathelees, this mayde bright of hewe
To handle her clothes, in which she was clad.	To handle hir clothes, wherinne she was clad.
Of which these ladies were not very happy	Of which thise ladyes were nat right glad
That women should undress her right there;	That wommen sholde dispoillen hire right theere;
She should bring into his house, he ordered	She sholde brynge into his hous, he bad
And so that nothing of her old belongings	And for that no thyng of hir olde geere
Honor her and love her, I pray,	Honoureth hire and loveth hire, I preye,
"This is my wife," said he, "that stands here.	"This is my wyf," quod he, "that standeth heere.
And to the people he said in this manner:	And to the peple he seyde in this manere:
Out of the door, and after that came she,	Out at the dore, and after that cam she,
And forth he goes with a full sober manner	And forth he gooth with a ful sobre cheere
"This is enough, Griselda mine," said he.	"This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he.
Even to be dead, though I would hate to die."	For to be deed, though me were looth to deye."
In deed nor thought, will I disobey you,	In werk ne thoght, I nyl yow disobeye,
And here I swear that never willingly,	And heere I swere that nevere willyngly,
Am I of that same honor that you offer me,	Am I to thilke honour that ye me beede,
She said, "Lord, unsuitable and unworthy	She seyde, "Lord, undigne and unworthy
Wondering upon these words, trembling for fear,	Wondrynge upon this word, quakynge for drede,
Swear this, and here I swear our alliance."	Swere this, and heere I swere oure alliance."
Neither by word nor frowning countenance?	Neither by word ne frownyng contenance?
And also when I say `yes,' say not `nay,'	And eek whan I sey `ye,' ne sey nat `nay,'
And you never to grouch about it, at any time?	And nevere ye to grucche it, nyght ne day?
As seems best to me, make you laugh or feel pain,	As me best thynketh, do yow laughe or smerte,
To all my desires, and that I freely may,	To al my lust, and that I frely may,
Will you assent, or else think it over?	Wol ye assente, or elles yow avyse?
"That, since it shall be done in a hasty manner,	"That, sith it shal be doon in hastif wyse,
But these questions ask I first," said he,	But thise demandes axe I first," quod he,
As I suppose, that you desire that it so be.	As I suppose, ye wol that it so be.
That I you wed, and also it may so stand,	That I yow wedde, and eek it may so stonde,
It is pleasing to your father and to me	It liketh to youre fader and to me
"Griselda," he said, "you shall well understand	"Grisilde," he seyde, "ye shal wel understonde
To this benign, true, faithful maid:	To this benigne, verray, feithful mayde:
These are the words that the marquis said	Thise arn the wordes that the markys sayde
For which she looked full pale in her face.	For which she looked with ful pale face.
She never was accustomed to such guests,	She nevere was to swiche gestes woned,
To see so great a guest come in that place;	To seen so greet a gest come in that place;
Though it is no wonder that she was astonished	No wonder is thogh that she were astoned
For never before saw she such a sight.	For nevere erst ne saugh she swich a sighte.
But certainly Griselda might wonder,	But outrely Grisildis wondre myghte,
And how attentively she cared for her dear father.	And tentifly she kepte hir fader deere.
And wondered in what a virtuous manner	And wondred hem in how honest manere
The people came unto outside the house,	The peple cam unto the hous withoute,
And in the chamber, while they were engaged in	And in the chambre, whil they were aboute
I will say nothing out of thy hearing."	I wol noght speke out of thyn audience."
And all this shall be done in thy presence;	And al this shal be doon in thy presence;
To be my wife and conduct herself as I decide.	To be my wyf and reule hire after me.
For I will ask if it be her will	For I wol axe if it hire wille be
Have a discussion, and knowest thou why?	Have a collacioun, and wostow why?
"That in thy chamber I and thou and she	"That in thy chambre I and thou and she
"Yet I want," said this marquis softly,	"Yet wol I," quod this markys softely,
Right as you please, govern this matter."	Right as yow lust, governeth this mateere."
Is as you wish, and against your pleasure	Is as ye wole, ne ayeynes youre likynge
But only thus: "Lord," said he, "my desire	But oonly thus: "Lord," quod he, "my willynge
He stood; hardly said he any more words,	He stood; unnethes seyde he wordes mo,
That he grew red; abashed and all trembling	That reed he wax; abayst and al quakynge
This sudden occurrence this man so astounded	This sodeyn cas this man astonyed so
To take me for thy son-in-law."	To take me as for thy sone-in-lawe."
If thou will agree with that proposal,	If that thou wolt unto that purpos drawe,
Tell me of that question that I have stated previously,	Tel me that poynt that I have seyd bifore,
It pleases thee, and specially therefore	It liketh thee, and specially therfore
And art my faithful liege man born,	And art my feithful lige man ybore,
"Thou lovest me, I know it well for certain,	"Thou lovest me, I woot it wel certeyn,
For my wife, until her life's end.	As for my wyf, unto hir lyves ende.
Thy daughter will I take, before I depart,	Thy doghter wol I take, er that I wende,
If thou agree, whatsoever may happen,	If that thou vouche sauf, what so bityde,
Longer hide the desire of my heart.	Lenger the plesance of myn herte hyde.
"Janicula, I neither may nor can	"Janicula, I neither may ne kan
And said thus, when he had him aside:	And seyde thus, whan he hym hadde asyde:
He by the hand then took this old man,	He by the hand thanne took this olde man,
And in she goes without longer delay,	And in she gooth withouten lenger lette,
Answered, "Lord, he is right here."	Answerde, "Lord, he is al redy heere."
And she with reverence, in humble manner,	And she with reverence, in humble cheere,
"Where is your father, O Griselda?" he said.	"Where is youre fader, O Grisildis?" he sayde.
Full soberly, and said in this manner:	Ful sobrely, and seyde in this manere:
This pensive marquis spoke unto this maid	This thoghtful markys spak unto this mayde
Until she had heard what was the lord's will.	Til she had herd what was the lordes wille.
And with sober countenance kneels without speaking,	And with sad contenance kneleth stille,
And down upon her knees she fell,	And doun upon hir knes she gan to falle,
And she set down her water pot quickly,	And she set doun hir water pot anon,
The marquis came and called her;	The markys cam and gan hire for to calle;
And as she would over her threshold go,	And as she wolde over hir threshold gon,
If she takes this way to the castle."	If she this wey unto the castel holde."
And then I may at leisure her behold,	And thanne I may at leyser hire biholde,
The chores that I must do,	The labour which that longeth unto me,
To do at home, as soon as it can be,	To doon at hoom, as soone as it may be,
The marchioness, and therefore will I try	The markysesse, and therfore wol I fonde
Who are my fellows, in our door and see	That been my felawes, in oure dore and se
She would be happy to have seen some of that sight.	She wolde fayn han seyn som of that sighte.
The marquis should wed, and if she could,	The markys sholde wedde, and if she myghte,
For well she had heard said that same day	For wel she hadde herd seyd that thilke day
And comes home as soon as ever she can;	And cometh hoom as soone as ever she may;
Has gone to fetch water at a well,	To fecchen water at a welle is went,
That for her was all this splendour prepared,	That for hire shapen was al this array,
Griselda of this, God knows, full ignorant,	Grisilde of this, God woot, ful innocent,
In this splendid array the direct route have held.	In this array the righte wey han holde.
Unto the village of which I told	Unto the village of the which I tolde
And of his retinue the knights,	And of his retenue the bachelrye,
Who were invited to the feast,	The whiche that to the feeste weren yprayed,
Lords and ladies in his company,	Lordes and ladyes in his compaignye,
This royal marquis, richly arrayed,	This roial markys, richely arrayed,
What can be found from as far as farthest Italy.	That may be founde as fer as last Ytaille.
There canst thou see, of delicious foods	Ther maystow seen, of deyntevous vitaille
Storage buildings stuffed with plenty,	Houses of office stuffed with plentee
Both hall and chambers, each in its turn;	Bothe halle and chambres, ech in his degree;
And all the palace was put in proper order,	And al the paleys put was in array,
The time of mid-morning of the same day	The time of undren of the same day
That unto such a wedding should be appropriate.	That unto swich a weddyng sholde falle.
And also of all other ornaments	And eek of othere aornementes alle
By a maid like her (in) stature,	By a mayde lyk to hire stature,
And of her clothing he took the measure	And of hir clothyng took he the mesure
Brooches and rings, for Griselda's sake;	Brooches and rynges, for Grisildis sake;
Of gems, set in gold and in azure,	Of gemmes, set in gold and in asure,
But nevertheless this marquis has made	But nathelees this markys hath doon make
Why will he thus himself and us deceive?"	Why wole he thus hymself and us bigile?"
"Will not our lord yet leave his vanity?	"Wol nat oure lord yet leve his vanytee?
And said, when they were in private,	And seyden, whan they were in privetee,
For which marvel wondered many a man,	For which merveille wondred many a man,
Tell what woman it should be;	Telle what womman that it sholde be;
The day of wedding came, but no person can	The day of weddyng cam, but no wight kan
Wed her only, if ever he should wed.	Wedde hire oonly, if evere he wedde sholde.
Her goodness, and decided that he would	Hir bountee, and disposed that he wolde
In virtue, he considered very carefully	In vertu, he considered ful right
For though the people have no great insight	For thogh the peple have no greet insight
And also her virtue, passing any person	And eek hir vertu, passynge any wight
Commending in his heart her womanly qualities,	Commendynge in his herte hir wommanhede,
Upon her demeanor he would often think,	Upon hir chiere he wolde hym ofte avyse,
His eyes cast on hire, but in serious manner	His eyen caste on hire, but in sad wyse
He not with lecherous looking of folly	He noght with wantown lookyng of folye
And when it happened that he might see her,	And whan it fil that he myghte hire espye,
By chance, as he on hunting rode;	As he on huntyng rood paraventure;
Very many times this marquis set his eye	Ful ofte sithe this markys sette his ye
Upon Griselda, this poor creature,	Upon Grisilde, this povre creature,
With every obedience and diligence	With everich obeisaunce and diligence
And ever she sustained her father's life	And ay she kepte hir fadres lyf on-lofte
And made her bed full hard and not at all soft;	And made hir bed ful hard and nothyng softe;
Which she shredded and boiled for their sustenance	The whiche she shredde and seeth for hir lyvynge,
Cabbages or other greens very often,	Wortes or othere herbes tymes ofte,
And when she homeward came, she would bring	And whan she homward cam, she wolde brynge
She would not be idle until she slept.	She wolde noght been ydel til she slepte.
A few sheep, while spinning, on field she kept;	A fewe sheep, spynnynge, on feeld she kepte;
Her old poor father she cared for.	Hir olde povre fader fostred shee.
There was enclosed a mature and steadfast spirit;	Ther was enclosed rype and sad corage;
Yet in the breast of her virginity	Yet in the brest of hire virginitee
But though this maid was tender of age,	But thogh this mayde tendre were of age,
She knew well labor but no idle ease.	She knew wel labour but noon ydel ese.
She drank, and because she would satisfy the demands of virtue	She drank, and for she wolde vertu plese,
Much more often of the well than of the wine barrel	Wel ofter of the welle than of the tonne
No sensual desire had run through her heart.	No likerous lust was thurgh hire herte yronne.
Because she was raised in poverty,	For povreliche yfostred up was she,
Then was she the fairest of all under sun;	Thanne was she oon the faireste under sonne;
And Griselda this young maiden was called.	And Grisildis this yonge mayden highte.
A daughter had he, fair enough in appearance,	A doghter hadde he, fair ynogh to sighte,
Janicula men of that village call him.	Janicula men of that throop hym calle.
His grace into a little ox's stall;	His grace into a litel oxes stalle;
But high God sometimes can send	But hye God somtyme senden kan
Who was considered poorest of them all;	Which that was holden povrest of hem alle;
Among these poor folk there dwelt a man	Amonges thise povre folk ther dwelte a man
According to what produce the earth gave them.	After that the erthe yaf hem habundance.
And of their labor took their sustenance,	And of hire labour tooke hir sustenance,
In which poor folk of that village	In which that povre folk of that village
There stood a small village, in a delightful location,	There stood a throop, of site delitable,
Where this marquis planned his marriage,	Wher as this markys shoop his mariage,
Not far from that same noble palace,	Noght fer fro thilke paleys honurable,
To lend honor unto the feast.	To doon unto the feeste reverence.
And each of them does all his efforts	And ech of hem dooth al his diligence
And they to his commandment obey,	And they to his comandement obeye,
Gave such orders as he desired to lay on them;	Swich charge yaf as hym liste on hem leye;
And to his household knights and squires	And to his privee knyghtes and squieres
And thereupon he to his officers	And heerupon he to his officeres
In accord with their wishes, and home again they go.	Of hire entente, and hoom agayn they wende.
All thanked him; and thus they have a conclusion	Hym thonken alle; and thus they han an ende
Kneeling upon their knees full reverently,	Knelynge upon hir knees ful reverently,
And they, with humble good will, obediently,	And they, with humble entente, buxomly,
And said he did all this at their request.	And seyde he dide al this at hir requeste.
On which he would be wedded surely,	On which he wolde be wedded sikerly,
He granted them a day, such as he pleased,	He graunted hem a day, swich as hym leste,
Lest the marquis no wife would wed.	Lest that the markys no wyf wolde wedde.
Of his wedding, as soon as ever he can;	Of his spousaille, as soone as evere he may;
That he would grant them a fixed day	That he wolde graunten hem a certein day
Beseeching him of grace, before they went,	Bisekynge hym of grace, er that they wenten,
To all this thing -- there said no person nay --	To al this thyng -- ther seyde no wight nay --
With heartfelt will they swore and assent	With hertely wyl they sworen and assenten
I pray you, speak no more of this matter."	I prey yow, speketh namoore of this matere."
And unless you will assent in such a manner,	And but ye wole assente in swich manere,
Where my heart is set, there will I take a wife;	Ther as myn herte is set, ther wol I wyve;
At your request, as ever I may thrive,	At youre requeste, as evere moot I thryve,
Against my choice shall neither grouch nor strive;	Agayn my choys shul neither grucche ne stryve;
"And furthermore, this shall you swear: that you	"And forthermoore, this shal ye swere: that ye
As if she were an emperor's daughter.	As she an emperoures doghter weere.
In word and deed, both here and everywhere,	In word and werk, bothe heere and everywheere,
To honor her, while her life may endure,	To worshipe hire, whil that hir lyf may dure,
Whatever wife I take, you me assure	What wyf that I take, ye me assure
But I you pray, and order you upon your life,	But I yow preye, and charge upon youre lyf,
That responsibility upon my back I will endure.	That charge upon my bak I wole endure.
"Let me alone in the choosing of my wife --	"Lat me allone in chesynge of my wyf --
My marriage and my estate and peace of mind	My mariage and myn estaat and reste
I trust in God's goodness, and therefore	I truste in Goddes bountee, and therfore
By which they are conceived and born.	Of which they been engendred and ybore.
All goodness comes from God, not from the lineage	Bountee comth al of God, nat of the streen
Unlike their worthy elders (who came) before them;	Unlyk hir worthy eldres hem bifore;
"For God knows it, that children often are	"For God it woot, that children ofte been
(From making) that choice and pray you to cease (making) that offer.	That choys and prey yow of that profre cesse.
To choose me a wife, I release you	To chese me a wyf, I yow relesse
But insofar as you have offered me to-day	But ther as ye han profred me to-day
Therefore of my free will I will assent	Wherfore of my free wyl I wole assente
And trust upon your intelligence, and always have done so;	And truste upon youre wit, and have doon ay;
"But nevertheless I see your true intent,	"But nathelees I se youre trewe entente,
Where I was free, I must be in servitude.	Ther I was free, I moot been in servage.
That seldom is found in marriage;	That seelde tyme is founde in mariage;
I rejoiced in my liberty,	I me rejoysed of my liberte,
That which I never before thought to compel myself.	To that I nevere erst thoughte streyne me.
"You want," said he, "my own people dear,	"Ye wol," quod he, "myn owene peple deere,
Made the marquis's heart have pity.	Made the markys herte han pitee.
Wherefore we pray you hastily to take a wife."	Wherfore we pray you hastily to wyve."
Your heritage, O woe would it be to us in our lifetime!	Youre heritage, O wo were us alyve!
And that a foreign successor should take	And that a straunge successour sholde take
That through your death your line should die out,	That thurgh youre deeth youre lyne sholde slake,
For if it so happen, may God forbid,	For if it so bifelle, as God forbede,
And take a wife, for high God's sake!	And taak a wyf, for hye Goddes sake!
"Deliver us out of all this constant fear,	"Delivere us out of al this bisy drede,
Honor to God and you, so far as we can judge.	Honour to God and yow, as we kan deeme.
Of all this land, so that it must seem	Of al this land, so that it oghte seme
Chose a wife for you, in short time at the least,	Chese yow a wyf, in short tyme atte leeste,
And we will, lord, if you will assent,	And we wol, lord, if that ye wole assente,
Who never yet refused your command,	That nevere yet refuseden youre heeste,
"Accept then the true intent of us,	"Accepteth thanne of us the trewe entente,
Are of that day when death shall on us fall.	Been of that day whan deeth shal on us falle.
That we shall die, as uncertain we all	That we shul deye, as uncerteyn we alle
And just as certainly as we know, each one of us,	And al so certein as we knowe echoon
In each rank, for there escapes no one;	In ech estaat, for ther escapeth noon;
And death menaces every age, and smites	And deeth manaceth every age, and smyt
"And though your green youth flowers as yet,	"And thogh youre grene youthe floure as yit,
Ever flees the time; it will wait for no man.	Ay fleeth the tyme; it nyl no man abyde.
For though we sleep, or wake, or roam, or ride,	For thogh we slepe, or wake, or rome, or ryde,
How our days pass in various ways,	How that oure dayes passe in sondry wyse,
And think, lord, among your wise thoughts	And thenketh, lord, among youre thoghtes wyse
Which men call marriage or wedlock;	Which that men clepe spousaille or wedlok;
Of sovereignty, not of servitude,	Of soveraynetee, noght of servyse,
"Bow your neck under that blissful yoke	"Boweth youre nekke under that blisful yok
Then your people would be in complete peace of mind.	Thanne were youre peple in sovereyn hertes reste.
Save one thing, lord, if it be your will,	Save o thyng, lord, if it youre wille be,
We might live in more happiness,	We myghte lyven in moore felicitee,
Could not ourselves imagine how	Ne koude nat us self devysen how
And all your actions, and ever have done so, that we	And al youre werk, and evere han doon, that we
"For certainly, lord, so well you please us	"For certes, lord, so wel us liketh yow
And you, my lord, to do right as it may please you.	And ye, my lord, to doon right as yow leste.
Of hearing to present our request,	Of audience to shewen oure requeste,
I dare the more confidently to ask of you a time	I dar the bettre aske of yow a space
Have always shown me favor and grace	Han alwey shewed me favour and grace
More than another man has in this place,	Moore than another man hath in this place,
"Although I have nothing to do in this matter	"Al have I noght to doone in this mateere
And let your ears not disdain (to hear) my voice.	And lat youre eres nat my voys desdeyne.
That we with pitiful heart may unto you complain,	That we with pitous herte unto yow pleyne,
Grant, lord, now of your nobility	Accepteth, lord, now of youre gentillesse
That we to you may tell our sorrow.	That we to yow mowe telle oure hevynesse.
As often as it is time (to do so) by necessity,	As ofte as tyme is of necessitee,
Makes us confident and gives us boldness,	Asseureth us and yeveth us hardinesse,
"O noble marquis, your graciousness	"O noble markys, youre humanitee
Or else he knew well how to present such a matter --	Or elles koude he shewe wel swich mateere --
That he should tell him what his people meant,	That he sholde telle hym what his peple mente,
Or else the one that the lord most readily would consent	Or elles that the lord best wolde assente
And one of them, that wisest was in learning --	And oon of hem, that wisest was of loore --
That in groups on one day they went to him,	That flokmeele on a day they to hym wente,
Only that point his people took so badly	Oonly that point his peple bar so soore
Wed any woman, for anything that may befall.	Wedde no wyf, for noght that may bifalle.
And also he would not -- and that was worst of all --	And eek he nolde -- and that was worst of alle --
Well nigh all other cares he let slip away,	Wel ny alle othere cures leet he slyde,
But on his immediate pleasure was all his thought,	But on his lust present was al his thoght,
In time coming what might happen to him,	In tyme comynge what myghte hym bityde,
I blame him thus: that he considered not	I blame hym thus: that he considered noght
And Walter was this young lord's name.	And Walter was this yonge lordes name.
Except in some things he was to blame;	Save in somme thynges that he was to blame;
Discreet enough to govern his country,	Discreet ynogh his contree for to gye,
And full of honor and of courtesy;	And ful of honour and of curteisye;
A handsome person, and strong, and young of age,	A fair persone, and strong, and yong of age,
The most noble born in Lombardy,	The gentilleste yborn of Lumbardye,
Both by his lords and by his citizenry.	Bothe of his lordes and of his commune.
Beloved and feared, through favor of Fortune,	Biloved and drad, thurgh favour of Fortune,
Thus in delight he lives, and has done since long before,	Thus in delit he lyveth, and hath doon yoore,
Were all his subjects, both lesser ranks and nobles.	Were alle his liges, bothe lasse and moore.
And obedient, ever ready to his hand (to do his commands),	And obeisant, ay redy to his hond,
As were his worthy elders before him;	As were his worthy eldres hym bifore;
A marquis once was lord of that land,	A markys whilom lord was of that lond,
But this is his tale, which you may hear."	But this his tale, which that ye may heere."
Save that he wishes to introduce his subject matter;	Save that he wole conveyen his mateere;
And truly, as to my judgment,	And trewely, as to my juggement,
Which would be a long thing to relate.	The which a long thyng were to devyse.
Toward Emelia, to Ferrara, and Venice,	To Emele-ward, to Ferrare, and Venyse,
That eastward ever increases in its course	That estward ay encresseth in his cours
Takes its first springing and its source,	Taketh his firste spryngyng and his sours,
Where the Po out of a small well	Where as the Poo out of a welle smal
And of Mount Vesulus in particular,	And of Mount Vesulus in special,
That are the boundaries of West Lombardy,	That been the boundes of West Lumbardye,
And speaks of the Apennines, the high hills,	And speketh of Apennyn, the hilles hye,
A proem, in which he describes	A prohemye, in the which discryveth he
Before he writes the body of his tale,	Er he the body of his tale writeth,
I say that first with high style he composes,	I seye that first with heigh stile he enditeth,
That taught me this tale, as I began,	That taughte me this tale, as I bigan,
"But forth to tell of this worthy man	"But forth to tellen of this worthy man
Has slain them both, and we all shall die.	Hem bothe hath slayn, and alle shul we dye.
But as if it were a twinkling of an eye,	But as it were a twynklyng of an ye,
But Death, that will not allow us to remain here,	But Deeth, that wol nat suffre us dwellen heer,
Or law, or other specialized field of study;	Or lawe, or oother art particuler;
Illuminated all Italy with poetry,	Enlumyned al Ytaille of poetrie,
Was called this clerk, whose sweet rhetoric	Highte this clerk, whos rethorike sweete
"Francis Petrarch, the laureate poet,	"Fraunceys Petrak, the lauriat poete,
I pray to God to give his soul rest.	I prey to God so yeve his soule reste!
He is now dead and nailed in his coffin;	He is now deed and nayled in his cheste;
As was proven by his words and his work.	As preved by his wordes and his werk.
Learned at Padua from a worthy clerk,	Lerned at Padowe of a worthy clerk,
I will tell you a tale which I	I wol yow telle a tale which that I
So far as reason demands, indeed.	As fer as resoun axeth, hardily.
You have the governance of us now,	Ye han of us as now the governance,
"Host," said he, "I am under your authority;	"Hooste," quod he, "I am under youre yerde;
This worthy clerk graciously answered:	This worthy clerk benignely answerde:
That we can understand what you say."	That we may understonde what ye seye."
Speak so plainly at this time, we pray of you,	Speketh so pleyn at this tyme, we yow preye,
High style, as when men write to kings.	Heigh style, as whan that men to kynges write.
Keep them in reserve until it so be that you compose	Keepe hem in stoor til so be ye endite
Your technical terms, your figures of speech, and your rhetorical devices,	Youre termes, youre colours, and youre figures,
"Tell us some merry thing of adventures.	"Telle us som murie thyng of aventures.
To make us weep for our old sins,	To make us for oure olde synnes wepe,
But preach not, as friars do in Lent,	But precheth nat, as freres doon in Lente,
He of necessity must assent unto the rules.	He nedes moot unto the pley assente.
For whatever man is entered in a game,	For what man that is entred in a pley,
Tell us some merry tale, by your faith!	Telle us som myrie tale, by youre fey!
It is no time to study here.	It is no tyme for to studien heere.
"For God's sake, cheer up!	"For Goddes sake, as beth of bettre cheere!
But Solomon says `every thing has its time.'	But Salomon seith `every thyng hath tyme.'
I suppose you are thinking about some logical problem;	I trowe ye studie aboute som sophyme;
Who is just married, sitting at the banquet table;	Were newe spoused, sittynge at the bord;
"You ride as demure and quiet as does a maid	"Ye ryde as coy and stille as dooth a mayde
"Sir Clerk of Oxford," our Host said,	"Sire Clerk of Oxenford," oure Hooste sayde,
A shop, and screwed for her living.	A shoppe, and swyved for hir sustenance.
And had a wife that kept for the sake of appearances	And hadde a wyf that heeld for contenance
Who loved dicing, and revelling, and having fun,	That lovede dys, and revel, and disport,
Unto a companion of his own sort,	Unto a compeer of his owene sort,
Right away he sent his bed and his clothing	Anon he sente his bed and his array
That which he can steal or may borrow,	Of that he brybe kan or borwe may,
And because there is no thief without an accomplice,	And for ther is no theef withoute a lowke,
Now let him revel all the night or leave off (do as he chooses).	Now lat hym riote al the nyght or leve.
And thus this jolly apprentice had his leave.	And thus this joly prentys hadde his leve.
And ordered him to go, with sorrow and with bad luck!	And bad hym go, with sorwe and with meschance!
Therefore his master gave him his certificate,	Therfore his maister yaf hym acquitance,
Than that he should ruin all the servants in the place.	Than he shende alle the servantz in the place.
It is much less harm to let him go away,	It is ful lasse harm to lete hym pace,
So fares it with a debauched servant;	So fareth it by a riotous servaunt;
Than that it rot al the remnant."	Than that it rotie al the remenaunt."
A proverb that says this same word:	Of a proverbe that seith this same word:
Upon a day, when Perkin sought his certificate of release,	Upon a day, whan he his papir soghte,
But at the last his master remembered,	But atte laste his maister hym bithoghte,
And sometimes taken (as a prisoner) with music to Newgate prison.	And somtyme lad with revel to Newegate.
Although he was rebuked both early and late,	Al were he snybbed bothe erly and late,
Until he was nearly out of his apprenticeship,	Til he were ny out of his prentishood,
This jolly apprentice with his master remained,	This joly prentys with his maister bood,
Are always incompatible, as anyone can see.	They been ful wrothe al day, as men may see.
Revelling and honesty, in one of low degree,	Revel and trouthe, as in a lowe degree,
For theft and debauchery, they are interchangeable.	For thefte and riot, they been convertible,
Even though he has no share of the entertainment (for which he pays).	Al have he no part of the mynstralcye.
His master shall pay for it in his shop,	His maister shal it in his shoppe abye,
Who makes a practice of dicing, debauchery, or womanizing,	That haunteth dys, riot, or paramour,
For surely (in the case of) an revelling apprentice	For sikerly a prentys revelour
For many times he found his cash box completely bare.	For often tyme he foond his box ful bare.
That found his master easily in his business accounts,	That fond his maister wel in his chaffare,
In his spending, in a private place.	Of his dispense, in place of pryvetee.
Than Perkin could, and thereto he was free	Than Perkyn koude, and therto he was free
For in the town there was no apprentice	For in the toune nas ther no prentys
To play at dice in such and such a street.	To pleyen at the dys in swich a streete.
And there they agreed on a time to meet,	And ther they setten stevene for to meete,
To dance and sing and make such merriment;	To hoppe and synge and maken swich disport;
And gathered him a company of his sort	And gadered hym a meynee of his sort
And danced well, he would not come back--	And daunced wel, he wolde nat come ayeyn --
Until that he had all the sight seen,	Til that he hadde al the sighte yseyn,
Out of the shop thither would he leap --	Out of the shoppe thider wolde he lepe --
For when there was any procession in Cheapside,	For whan ther any ridyng was in Chepe,
At every wedding party he would sing and dance;	At every bridale wolde he synge and hoppe;
Happy was the wench who with him might meet.	Wel was the wenche with hym myghte meete.
As is the hive full of honey sweet;	As is the hyve ful of hony sweete;
He was as full of love and womanizing	He was as ful of love and paramour
That he was called Perkin Reveler.	That he was cleped Perkyn Revelour.
He could dance so well and jollily	Dauncen he koude so wel and jolily
With locks black, combed full elegantly.	With lokkes blake, ykembd ful fetisly.
Brown as a berry, a good-looking short fellow,	Broun as a berye, a propre short felawe,
Gaily dressed he was as is a goldfinch in the woods,	Gaillard he was as goldfynch in the shawe,
A apprentice once dwelt in our city,	A prentys whilom dwelled in oure citee,
Here begins the Cook's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Cookes Tale.
And told his tale, as you shall next hear.	And seyde his tale, as ye shul after heere.
And with that he laughed and made good cheer,	And therwithal he lough and made cheere,
But before we part, indeed, thou shalt be repaid."	But er we parte, ywis, thou shalt be quit."
But nonetheless I will not tell it yet;	But nathelees I wol nat telle it yit;
Even though my tale is of an inn-keeper.	Though that my tale be of an hostileer.
Be thou not angry, ere we depart here,	Be thou nat wrooth, er we departen heer,
And therefore, Harry Bailly, by thy faith,	And therfore, Herry Bailly, by thy feith,
"Thou sayest the truth," said Roger, "by my faith!	"Thou seist ful sooth," quod Roger, "by my fey!
A man may speak very truthfully in joking and play."	A man may seye ful sooth in game and pley."
But yet I pray thee, be not angry about a joke;	But yet I pray thee, be nat wroth for game;
Now tell on, gentle Roger by thy name.	Now telle on, gentil Roger by thy name.
For in thy shop is many a fly loose.	For in thy shoppe is many a flye loos.
Which they have eaten with thy stubble-fed goose,	That they han eten with thy stubbel goos,
For of thy parsley yet they fare the worse,	For of thy percely yet they fare the wors,
Of many a pilgrim hast thou Christ's curse,	Of many a pilgrym hastow Cristes curs,
That has been twice hot and twice cold.	That hath been twies hoot and twies coold.
For of many a pastry hast thou drawn out the gravy,	For many a pastee hastow laten blood,
Now tell on, Roger; look that it be good,	Now telle on, Roger; looke that it be good,
Our Host answered and said, "I grant it to thee.	Oure Hoost answerde and seide, "I graunte it thee.
A little amusing affair that happened in our city."	A litel jape that fil in oure citee."
I will tell you, as well as ever I can,	I wol yow telle, as wel as evere I kan,
A tale by me, who am a poor man,	A tale of me, that am a povre man,
And therefore, if you agree to hear	And therfore, if ye vouche-sauf to heere
But God forbid that we stop here;	But God forbede that we stynte heere;
He had a malicious trick played on him in the dark.	He hadde a jape of malice in the derk.
If ever, since I was called Roger of Ware,	If evere, sitthe I highte Hogge of Ware,
I pray to God, give me sorrow and care	I pray to God, so yeve me sorwe and care
Whom he brings into his private home.	Whom that he broghte into his pryvetee.
Well ought a man to take heed	Wel oghte a man avysed for to be
For providing lodging by night is perilous.	For herberwynge by nyghte is perilous.
`Do not bring every man into thy house,'	`Ne bryng nat every man into thyn hous,'
Well said Salomon in his language,	Wel seyde Salomon in his langage,
To his logical argument about lodging!	Upon his argument of herbergage!
This miller had a sharp conclusion	This millere hadde a sharp conclusion
Was so happy he thought the Reeve scratched him on the back.	For joye him thoughte he clawed him on the bak.
The Cook of London, while the Reeve spoke,	The Cook of Londoun, whil the Reve spak,
The Prologue of the Cook's Tale	The Prologe of the Cokes Tale
I know no more; my tale is at an end.	I kan namoore; my tale is at an ende.
Now tell me, before you farther go.	Now telleth me, er that ye ferther wende.
Which was the most free, as it seems to you?	Which was the mooste fre, as thynketh yow?
Gentlemen, this question, then, will I ask now,	Lordynges, this question, thanne, wol I aske now,
And took his horse, and forth he goes his way.	And took his hors, and forth he goth his way.
It is enough, and farewell, have good day!"	It is ynogh, and farewel, have good day!"
For all my craft, nor anything for my labor.	For al my craft, ne noght for my travaille.
For, sir, I will not take a penny from thee	For, sire, I wol nat taken a peny of thee
Nor never before now had known me.	Ne nevere er now ne haddest knowen me.
As if thou right now were crept out of the ground,	As thou right now were cropen out of the ground,
Sir, I release thee from thy (debt of a) thousand pounds,	Sire, I releesse thee thy thousand pound,
As well as any of you, it is no doubt!	As wel as any of yow, it is no drede!
That a clerk could not do a gentle deed	But if a clerk koude doon a gentil dede
But God forbid, for his blissful might,	But God forbede, for his blisful myght,
Thou art a squire, and he is a knight;	Thou art a squier, and he is a knyght;
This scientist answered, "Dear brother,	This philosophre answerde, "Leeve brother,
This is the entire matter; there is no more to say."	This al and som; ther is namoore to seyn."
As freely I sent her to him again.	As frely sente I hire to hym ageyn.
And right as freely as he sent her to me,	And right as frely as he sente hire me,
"That made me have for her such great pity;	"That made me han of hire so greet pitee;
She never before had heard tell of illusion.	She nevere erst hadde herde speke of apparence.
And that her word she swore through ignorance,	And that hir trouthe she swoor thurgh innocence,
And that she would rather have lost her life that day,	And that she levere had lost that day hir lyf,
How loathfull to her it was to be a wicked wife,	How looth hire was to been a wikked wyf,
Than that his wife would be false of her pledged word."	Than that his wyf were of hir trouthe fals."
Had rather die in sorrow and in distress	Hadde levere dye in sorwe and in distresse
He said, "Arveragus, of his nobility,	He seide, "Arveragus, of gentillesse,
There is no need to repeat it to you again.	It nedeth nat to yow reherce it moore.
And told him all, as you have heard before;	And tolde hym al, as ye han herd bifoore;
Aurelius his tale immediately began,	Aurelius his tale anon bigan,
"What was the cause? Tel me if thou know how."	"What was the cause? Tel me if thou kan."
"No, no," said he, and sorrowfully he sighs.	"No, no," quod he, and sorwefully he siketh.
"Hast thou not had thy lady as it pleases thee?"	"Hastow nat had thy lady as thee liketh?"
"Have I not kept my agreement with thee?"	"Have I nat holden covenant unto thee?"
And said thus, when he heard these words:	And seyde thus, whan he thise wordes herde:
This scientist soberly answered,	This philosophre sobrely answerde,
My heritage; there is no more to tell."	Myn heritage; ther is namoore to telle."
Then I would be well; for otherwise I must sell	Thanne were I wel; for elles moot I selle
To grant me a respite for two years or three,	Two yeer or thre for to respiten me,
But if you would agree, upon my promise,	But wolde ye vouche sauf, upon seuretee,
To go a-begging in my bare tunic.	To goon a-begged in my kirtle bare.
To you, even though I have	Towardes yow, howevere that I fare
I failed never of my pledged word as yet.	I failled nevere of my trouthe as yit.
And said, "Master, I dare well make boast,	And seyde, "Maister, I dar wel make avaunt,
To grant him days (on which to pay) the remnant;	To graunte hym dayes of the remenaunt;
And him beseeches, of his nobleness,	And hym bisecheth, of his gentillesse,
The value of five hundred pounds, I guess,	The value of fyve hundred pound, I gesse,
And brought gold unto this scientist,	And broghte gold unto this philosophre,
With a sore heart he goes unto his money box,	With herte soor he gooth unto his cofre,
My word I will keep, I will not lie."	My trouthe wol I kepe, I wol nat lye."
And thank him for his great courtesy.	And thanke hym of his grete curteisye.
But nonetheless, I will try him, (offering)	But nathelees, I wole of hym assaye,
Unless I can get a better grace (favor) from him.	But I of hym may gete bettre grace.
And shame all my kin in this place,	And shamen al my kynrede in this place,
And be a beggar; here I may not remain	And been a beggere; heere may I nat dwelle
My heritage I must of necessity sell,	Myn heritage moot I nedes selle,
I see no more but that I am ruined.	I se namoore but that I am fordo.
Unto this scientist! What shall I do?	Unto this philosophre! How shal I do?
Of refined gold a thousand pounds of weight	Of pured gold a thousand pound of wighte
"Alas!" said he. "Alas, that I promised	"Allas!" quod he. "Allas, that I bihighte
Aurelius, that all his expenditure has forfeited,	Aurelius, that his cost hath al forlorn,
Of these two folk you get of me no more.	Of thise two folk ye gete of me namoore.
And she was to him true for evermore.	And she was to hym trewe for everemoore.
He cherishes her as though she were a queen,	He cherisseth hire as though she were a queene,
Never again was there any anger between them.	Nevere eft ne was ther angre hem bitwene.
In perfect bliss lead forth their life.	In sovereyn blisse leden forth hir lyf.
Arveragus and Dorigen his wife	Arveragus and Dorigen his wyf
Why should I write longer about this matter?	What sholde I lenger of this cas endyte?
That it would be impossible for me to write.	That it were impossible me to wryte.
And told him all, as you have heard me say;	And tolde hym al, as ye han herd me sayd;
And home unto her husband she is gone,	And hoom unto hir housbonde is she fare,
She thanks him upon her bare knees,	She thonketh hym upon hir knees al bare,
As well as can a knight, without doubt."	As wel as kan a knyght, withouten drede."
Thus can a squire do a gentle deed	Thus kan a squier doon a gentil dede
Remember Dorigen, at the least.	On Dorigen remembreth, atte leeste.
But let every wife beware of her promise!	But every wyf be war of hire biheeste!
That ever yet I knew in all my life.	That evere yet I knew in al my lyf.
Of the truest and the best wife	As of the treweste and the beste wyf
I pledge my word, I shall never reprove you	My trouthe I plighte, I shal yow never repreve
Since that time when you were born.	Sith thilke tyme which that ye were born.
That you have made to me before now,	That ye han maad to me as heerbiforn,
Freely every pledge and every bond	Quyt every serement and every bond
I release you, madam, into your hand I return	I yow relesse, madame, into youre hond
Than I should break apart the love between you two.	Than I departe the love bitwix yow two.
I would well rather suffer woe always	I have wel levere evere to suffre wo
Than you should thus break your pledged word to me,	Than ye to me sholde breke thus youre trouthe,
That he would rather have shame (and that would be a pity)	That him were levere han shame (and that were routhe)
That since I see his great graciousness	That sith I se his grete gentillesse
"Madam, say to your lord Arveragus	"Madame, seyth to youre lord Arveragus
For which in few words he said thus:	For which in fewe wordes seyde he thus:
Against generosity and all nobility of character;	Agayns franchise and alle gentillesse;
Than do so great a churlish despicable act	Than doon so heigh a cherlyssh wrecchednesse
That he would rather yet refrain from his desire	That fro his lust yet were hym levere abyde
Considering what would be best in every respect,	Considerynge the beste on every syde,
And in his heart he took great pity on this,	And in his herte he caughte of this greet routhe,
So hateful to him it was that his wife should break her word;	So looth hym was his wyf sholde breke hir trouthe;
And of Arveragus, the worthy knight,	And of Arveragus, the worthy knyght,
Of her and of her lamentation,	Of hire and of hire lamentacioun,
And in his heart had great compassion	And in his herte hadde greet compassioun
Aurelius began to wonder about this case,	Aurelius gan wondren on this cas,
My pledged word to keep -- alas, alas!"	My trouthe for to holde -- allas, allas!"
"Unto the garden, as my husband commanded,	"Unto the gardyn, as myn housbonde bad,
And she answered, as if she were half mad,	And she answerde, half as she were mad,
And asked her where she went;	And asked of hire whiderward she wente;
And he salutes her cheerfully,	And he saleweth hire with glad entente,
Out of her house to any sort of place.	Out of hir hous to any maner place.
For well he spied when she would go	For wel he spyed whan she wolde go
And he was going toward the garden also;	And he was to the gardyn-ward also;
Toward the garden where she had promised (to go).	Toward the gardyn ther as she had hight.
As she was about to go the way directly	As she was bown to goon the wey forth right
Amidst the town, right in the busiest street,	Amydde the toun, right in the quykkest strete,
By chance happened to meet her	Of aventure happed hire to meete
On Dorigen who was so amorous,	On Dorigen that was so amorus,
This squire, who was called Aurelius,	This squier, which that highte Aurelius,
She may have better fortune than it seems to you;	She may have bettre fortune than yow semeth;
Listen to the tale before you cry out about her.	Herkneth the tale er ye upon hire crie.
That he will put his wife in jeopardy.	That he wol putte his wyf in jupartie.
Will consider him a foolish man in this	Wol holden hym a lewed man in this
Perhaps a heap of you, indeed,	Paraventure an heep of yow, ywis,
He would no person tell his intention.	He nolde no wight tellen his entente.
But they knew not why she thither went.	But they ne wiste why she thider wente.
They take their leave, and on their way they go,	They take hir leve, and on hir wey they gon,
"And bring her to such a place quickly."	"And bryngeth hire to swich a place anon."
And forth he called a squire and a maid:	And forth he cleped a squier and a mayde:
That folk may believe or guess anything harmful concerning you."	That folk of yow may demen harm or gesse."
Nor make any outward appearance of sadness,	Ne make no contenance of hevynesse,
As I best can, I will my woe endure --	As I may best, I wol my wo endure --
Thou tell any person about this adventure --	To no wight telle thou of this aventure --
That never, while thy life or breath lasts,	That nevere, whil thee lasteth lyf ne breeth,
And said, "I you forbid, upon pain of death,	And seyde, "I yow forbede, up peyne of deeth,
But with that word he immediately burst into tears,	But with that word he brast anon to wepe,
One's pldged word is the highest thing that one may keep" --	Trouthe is the hyeste thyng that man may kepe" --
For sheer love which I to have for you,	For verray love which that I to yow have,
I had well rather be stabbed	I hadde wel levere ystiked for to be
For as surely as God may have mercy upon me,	For God so wisly have mercy upon me,
You shall keep your pledged word, by my faith!	Ye shul youre trouthe holden, by my fay!
It may be well, perhaps, yet to day.	It may be wel, paraventure, yet to day.
"Yes, wife," he said, "let sleep that which is still.	"Ye, wyf," quod he, "lat slepen that is stille.
This is too much, even if it were God's will."	This is to muche, and it were Goddes wille."
"Nay, nay," she said, "So help me God!	"Nay, nay," quod she, "God helpe me so as wys!
"Is there anything else, Dorigen, but this?"	"Is ther oght elles, Dorigen, but this?"
This husband, with cheerful demeanor, in a friendly manner	This housbonde, with glad chiere, in freendly wyse
There is no need to repeat it to you any more.	It nedeth nat reherce it yow namoore.
And told him all as you have heard before;	And toold hym al as ye han herd bifore;
Thus have I said," said she, "thus have I sworn" --	Thus have I seyd," quod she, "thus have I sworn" --
"Alas," said she, "that ever I was born!	"Allas," quod she, "that evere was I born!
And she began to weep, ever the longer (she wept) the more (she wept) .	And she gan wepen ever lenger the moore.
And asked her why she wept so bitterly;	And asked hire why that she weep so soore;
Home came Arveragus, this worthy knight,	Hoom cam Arveragus, this worthy knyght,
But neverthelees, upon the third night,	But nathelees, upon the thridde nyght,
Thus Dorigen complained a day or two,	Thus pleyned Dorigen a day or tweye,
Of Rhodogune, and also Valeria."	Of Rodogone, and eek Valeria."
The same thing I say of Bilia,	The same thyng I seye of Bilyea,
To all wives may be a mirror.	To alle wyves may a mirour bee.
O Teuta, queen, thy wifely chastity	O Teuta, queene, thy wyfly chastitee
Honored is through all heathendom.	Honured is thurgh al the Barbarie.
The perfect wifehood of Arthemesie	The parfit wyfhod of Arthemesie
To whom she had entirely given her heart.	To whom she hadde al hool hir herte yive.
Without Brutus she could not live,	Withoute Brutus koude she nat lyve,
No longer would she live after his day (i.e., death).	Ne lenger wolde she lyve after his day.
That when at Troy Protheselaus was slain,	That whan at Troie was slayn Protheselaus,
By God, of Laodomia is written thus,	Pardee, of Laodomya is writen thus,
All Greece knows of her chastity.	Al Grece knoweth of hire chastitee.
"What says Homer of good Penelope?	"What seith Omer of goode Penalopee?
Lo, what a wife was Alcestis," she said.	Lo, which a wyf was Alceste," quod she.
Than to allow his body to be unburied.	Than for to suffre his body unburyed be.
His lover, who chose rather to die	His love, that rather for to dyen chees
How true also to Alcebiades was	How trewe eek was to Alcebiades
What shall I say of Nicerates' wife,	What shal I seye of Nicerates wyf,
She with her death avenged her maidenhood.	She with hire deeth hir maydenhede redressed.
Because one of Macedonia had raped her,	For oon of Macidonye hadde hire oppressed,
Another Theban maiden did exactly the same;	Another Theban mayden dide right so;
Slew herself, exactly for such sort of woe.	Hirselven slow, right for swich manere wo.
The Theban maiden that for Nichanore	The Theban mayden that for Nichanore
As great a pity was it, or well more,	As greet a pitee was it, or wel moore,
Who slew themselves for a similar sort of cause.	That slowe hemself for swich manere cas.
To read how thy daughters died, alas,	To reden how thy doghtren deyde, allas,
Because she would not defiled be.	By cause that she wolde nat defouled be.
As did Demotion's daughter dear	As dide Demociones doghter deere
Or rather slay myself in some manner,	Or rather sleen myself in som manere,
I will be true unto Arveragus,	I wol be trewe unto Arveragus,
To slay myself than be defiled thus.	To sleen myself than been defouled thus.
I will conclude that it is better for me	I wol conclude that it is bet for me
Well rather than they would be defiled?	Wel rather than they wolde defouled be?
Since so many have themselves slain	Sith that so manye han hemselven slayn
"Why should I tell more examples concerning this,	"What sholde I mo ensamples heerof sayn,
And said, `My body, at the least,	And seyde, `My body, at the leeste way,
In Habradate's wounds deep and wide,	In Habradates woundes depe and wyde,
Herself slew, and let her blood pour	Hirselven slow, and leet hir blood to glyde
When Habradate was slain, his wife so dear	Whan Habradate was slayn, his wyf so deere
Could I now tell concerning this matter.	Koude I now telle as touchynge this mateere.
More than a thousand stories, as I guess,	Mo than a thousand stories, as I gesse,
Rather than folk of Galatia should rape them.	Rather than folk of Gawle hem sholde oppresse.
Have slain themselves, for sheer dread and woe,	Han slayn hemself, for verrey drede and wo,
The seven maidens of Miletus also	The sevene maydens of Milesie also
By Tarquin, for she thought it was a shame	Of Tarquyn, for hire thoughte it was a shame
At Rome, when she was raped	At Rome, whan that she oppressed was
Has not Lucretia slain herself, alas,	Hath nat Lucresse yslayn hirself, allas,
Than any Roman did her a dishonor.	Than any Romayn dide hire vileynye.
Into the fire, and chose rather to die	Into the fyr, and chees rather to dye
She took her children all, and leaped down	She took hir children alle, and skipte adoun
For when she saw that Romans won the town,	For whan she saugh that Romayns wan the toun,
That at Carthage deprived herself of her life?	That at Cartage birafte hirself hir lyf?
What shall I say of Hasdrubale's wife,	What shal I seyn of Hasdrubales wyf,
Well ought a wife rather herself slay	Wel oghte a wyf rather hirselven slee
To be defiled by man's foul delight,	To been defouled with mannes foul delit,
"Now since maidens had such disdain	"Now sith that maydens hadden swich despit
Until she was slain, right in the same place.	Til she was slayn, right in the selve place.
No person could pull her hands away from it	No wight ne myghte hir handes of it arace
From which statue she would never go.	Fro which ymage wolde she nevere go.
And seized the statue in her two hands,	And hente the ymage in hir handes two,
Unto Diana's temple she goes directly,	Unto Dianes temple goth she right,
When her father was slain on a night,	Whan that hir fader slayn was on a nyght,
Lo, also, the tyrant Aristoclides,	Lo, eek, the tiraunt Aristoclides,
Why should I then be afraid to die?	Why sholde I thanne to dye been in drede?
To be deprived of her maidenhood.	To been oppressed of hir maydenhede.
Chose rather to die than assent	Chees rather for to dye than assente
That she was not slain, and with a good intent	That she nas slayn, and with a good entente
But there was none of all that company	But was ther noon of al that compaignye
On whom they would do their lechery.	On whiche they wolden doon hir lecherye.
Fifty maidens of Sparta also,	Of Lacedomye fifty maydens eke,
"They of Messene had (people) search out and seek	"They of Mecene leete enquere and seke
They secretly have leaped into a well	They prively been stirt into a welle
Rather than they would lose their maidenhood,	Rather than they wolde lese hir maydenhede,
For which these woeful maidens, full of dread,	For which thise woful maydens, ful of drede,
Upon the pavement, God give them misfortune!	Upon the pavement, God yeve hem meschaunce!
And in their father's blood they made them dance	And in hir fadres blood they made hem daunce
All naked, to fulfill their foul delight,	Al naked, to fulfille hir foul delit,
And bring them before them as an insult,	And bryngen hem biforn hem in despit,
They commanded (the guards) to seize his daughters	They comanded his doghtres for t' areste
Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,	Hadde slayn Phidon in Atthenes atte feste,
"Yes indeed, certainly, lo, these stories bear witness:	"Yis, certes, lo, thise stories beren witnesse:
Rather than do sin with her body?	Rather than with hir body doon trespas?
And many a maid, slain herself, alas,	And many a mayde, yslayn hirself, allas,
Has there not many a noble wife before this,	Hath ther nat many a noble wyf er this,
And with my death I may be free from blame, indeed.	And with my deth I may be quyt, ywis.
Or know myself false, or lose my good name;	Or knowe myselven fals, or lese my name;
My life than of my body to have a shame,	My lif than of my body to have a shame,
But neverthelees, yet I would rather lose	But nathelees, yet have I levere to lese
One of these two I am compelled to choose.	Oon of thise two bihoveth me to chese.
From which to escape I know no help,	Fro which t' escape woot I no socour,
That without warning hast wrapped me in thy chain,	That unwar wrapped hast me in thy cheyne,
"Alas," said she, "on thee, Fortune, I complain,	"Allas," quod she, "on thee, Fortune, I pleyne,
In her complaint, as you shall after hear:	In hire compleynt, as ye shal after heere:
With face pale and with full sorrowful manner,	With face pale and with ful sorweful cheere,
But to herself she spoke, and said thus,	But to hirself she spak, and seyde thus,
For Arveragus had gone out of town.	For out of towne was goon Arveragus.
But why it was she told to no person,	But why it was to no wight tolde shee,
And swoons, that it was pitiful to see.	And swowneth, that it routhe was to see.
For sheer fear she can hardly walk.	For verray feere unnethe may she go.
And home she goes a sorrowful creature;	And hoom she goth a sorweful creature;
It is against the laws of nature."	It is agayns the proces of nature."
That such a wonder or marvel could be!	That swich a monstre or merveille myghte be!
For I never supposed by possibility	For wende I nevere by possibilitee
"Alas," she said, "that ever this should happen!	"Allas," quod she, "that evere this sholde happe!
She never expected to have come in such a trap.	She wende nevere han come in swich a trappe.
In all her face was not a drop of blood.	In al hir face nas a drope of blood.
He takes his leave, and she astounded stood;	He taketh his leve, and she astoned stood;
In you lies the power to make me live or die --	In yow lith al to do me lyve or deye --
For, living or dead, right there you shall find me.	For, quyk or deed, right there ye shal me fynde.
Do as you please; have your promise in mind,	Dooth as yow list; have youre biheste in mynde,
And if you agree, you may go see.	And if ye vouche sauf, ye may go see.
I have done as you commanded me;	I have do so as ye comanded me;
More than to save my heart's life right now --	Moore than to save myn hertes lyf right now --
Madam, I speak it for your honor	Madame, I speke it for the honour of yow
Although I am unworthy of it.	Al be that I unworthy am therto.
To love me best -- God knows, you said so,	To love me best -- God woot, ye seyde so,
You know right well what you promised me;	Ye woot right wel what ye bihighten me;
But in a garden yonder, at a particular place,	But in a gardyn yond, at swich a place,
From you, my sovereign lady, except for your good favor --	Of yow, my sovereyn lady, but youre grace --
Not that I claim any thing as a right	Nat that I chalange any thyng of right
For, madam, you know well what you have promised --	For, madame, wel ye woot what ye han hight --
Before you slay me because I love you.	Er ye me sleen by cause that I yow love.
Repent, for that God above,	Repenteth yow, for thilke God above,
Think carefully before you break your pledged word.	Avyseth yow er that ye breke youre trouthe.
But though you have no pity on my death,	But of my deeth thogh that ye have no routhe,
But certainly either I must die or complain;	But certes outher moste I dye or pleyne;
I would tell nothing of how I am beset by woe.	Noght wolde I telle how me is wo bigon.
That I must die here at your feet right now,	That I moste dyen heere at youre foot anon,
Were it not that I for you have such distress	Nere it that I for yow have swich disese
And am of all this world most reluctant to displease,	And lothest were of al this world displese,
"Whom I most dread and love as I best know how,	"Whom I moost drede and love as I best kan,
"My true lady," said this woeful man,	"My righte lady," quod this woful man,
Has saluted his sovereign lady dear:	Salewed hath his sovereyn lady deere:
With fearful heart and with full humble manner,	With dredful herte and with ful humble cheere,
Where he knew he should see his lady.	Where as he knew he sholde his lady see.
And to the temple he has held forth his way,	And to the temple his wey forth hath he holde,
Who have helped me out of my deadly cares."	That me han holpen fro my cares colde."
Thank you, lord, and my lady Venus,	Thanke yow, lord, and lady myn Venus,
And said, "I woeful wretched, Aurelius,	And seyde, "I woful wrecche, Aurelius,
Down to his mistress' feet he fell at once,	Doun to his maistres feet he fil anon,
That every one of these rocks were removed,	That voyded were thise rokkes everychon,
And when he knew that there was no obstacle,	And whan he knew that ther was noon obstacle,
Waits night and day for this miracle;	Awaiteth nyght and day on this myracle;
Aurelius, who is yet in despair	Aurelius, which that yet despeired is
It seemed that all the rocks were away.	It semed that alle the rokkes were aweye.
But through his magic, for a week or two,	But thurgh his magik, for a wyke or tweye,
For which no longer he made delay,	For which no lenger maked he delayes,
As heathen folk used in those days.	As hethen folk useden in thilke dayes.
For such illusions and such evil practices	For swiche illusiouns and swiche meschaunces
And knew also his other observations	And knew also his othere observaunces
In accordance with his operation,	Acordaunt to his operacioun,
And knew full well the moon's position	And knew ful weel the moones mansioun
And knew the arising of his moon well,	And knew the arisyng of his moone weel,
He knew the remnant by astronomical tables,	He knew the remenaunt by proporcioun,
When he had found his first position of the moon,	Whan he hadde founde his firste mansioun,
Full subtly he calculated all this.	Ful subtilly he kalkuled al this.
That in the ninth sphere is observed;	That in the ninthe speere considered is;
From the head of that fixed Aries above,	Fro the heed of thilke fixe Aries above,
He knew full well how far the star Alnath was shoved	He knew ful wel how fer Alnath was shove
And by his eighth sphere in his working	And by his eighte speere in his wirkyng
For his divisions of the sphere in every detail.	For his equacions in every thyng.
Such as are his table of distances and his angles for calculation	As been his centris and his argumentz
Nor his dates for calculations, nor his other apparatus,	Ne his rootes, ne his othere geeris,
Neither his tables of single years nor of twenty-year periods,	Neither his collect ne his expans yeeris,
Accurately corrected, nor was there anything lacking,	Ful wel corrected, ne ther lakked nought,
His astronomical tables of Toledo he brought forth,	His tables Tolletanes forth he brought,
Of such a superstitious cursedness.	Of swich a supersticious cursednesse.
To make his tricks and his wretched deeds	To maken his japes and his wrecchednesse
So at the last he has his time found	So atte laste he hath his tyme yfounde
Or else they were sunk under ground.	Or ellis they were sonken under grounde.
That she and every person should believe and say	That she and every wight sholde wene and seye
I know no technical terms of astrology --	I ne kan no termes of astrologye --
By such an appearance or conjurer's trick --	By swich an apparence or jogelrye --
This is to say, to make illusion,	This is to seye, to maken illusioun,
To seek a time for his astronomical operation;	To wayten a tyme of his conclusioun;
That night and day he worked as fast as he can	That nyght and day he spedde hym that he kan
This subtle clerk had such pity for this man	This subtil clerk swich routhe had of this man
Or with a sword he would slit his heart.	Or with a swerd that he wolde slitte his herte.
To bring him out of his bitter pains,	To bryngen hym out of his peynes smerte,
Provides for this master entertainment and reverence,	Dooth to this maister chiere and reverence,
Aurelius in all that ever he can	Aurelius in al that evere he kan
And "Noel" cries every lusty man.	And "Nowel" crieth every lusty man.
Before him stands meat of the tusked boar,	Biforn hym stant brawen of the tusked swyn,
And drinks the wine from his buffalo horn;	And drynketh of his bugle horn the wyn;
Janus sits by the fire, with double beard,	Janus sit by the fyr, with double berd,
Have destroyed the green in every garden.	Destroyed hath the grene in every yerd.
The bitter frosts, with the sleet and rain,	The bittre frostes, with the sleet and reyn,
Where he shone full pale, I dare well say.	Where as he shoon ful pale, I dar wel seyn.
Shone like burnished gold with bright rays;	Shoon as the burned gold with stremes brighte;
That in his hot declination (in summer)	That in his hoote declynacion
Phoebus grew old, and colored grayish silver,	Phebus wax old, and hewed lyk laton,
The cold, frosty season of December.	The colde, frosty seson of Decembre.
And this was, as these books remind me,	And this was, as thise bookes me remembre,
And are arrived where they would stay.	And been descended ther they wolde abyde.
Aurelius and this magician beside him,	Aurelius and this magicien bisyde,
To Brittany took they the direct route,	To Britaigne tooke they the righte way,
Upon the morrow, when it was day,	Upon the morwe, whan that it was day,
What for his labor and his hope of bliss,	What for his labour and his hope of blisse,
And well nigh all that night he had his rest.	And wel ny al that nyght he hadde his reste.
To bed is gone Aurelius when it pleased him,	To bedde is goon Aurelius whan hym leste,
"Nay," said this clerk, "have here my faith as a pledge."	"Nay," quod this clerk, "have heer my feith to borwe."
You delay us here any longer than to-morrow."	Ye tarie us heere no lenger than to-morwe."
But look now, for no negligence or laziness	But looketh now, for no necligence or slouthe
You shall be paid truly, by my pledged word!	Ye shal be payed trewely, by my trouthe!
This bargain is fully concluded, for we are agreed.	This bargayn is ful dryve, for we been knyt.
I would give it, if I were lord of it.	I wolde it yeve, if I were lord of it.
Answered thus: "Fie on a thousand pounds!	Answerde thus: "Fy on a thousand pound!
Aurelius, with blissful heart, at once	Aurelius, with blisful herte anoon,
Nor would he go gladly even for that sum.	Ne gladly for that somme he wolde nat goon.
Less than a thousand pounds he would not have,	Lasse than a thousand pound he wolde nat have,
He raised difficulties, and swore, as God may him save,	He made it straunge, and swoor, so God hym save,
And also from Gironde to the mouth of Seine.	And eek from Gerounde to the mouth of Sayne.
To remove all the rocks of Brittany,	To remoeven alle the rokkes of Britayne,
What sum this master's payment should be	What somme sholde this maistres gerdon be
At after-supper they began to discuss	At after-soper fille they in tretee
"Go we then to sup," said he, "as is the best (to do).	"Go we thanne soupe," quod he, "as for the beste.
It is all ready, even if you want it right now."	It is al redy, though ye wol right now."
"Sir," said this squire, "when it pleases you,	"Sire," quod this squier, "whan it liketh yow,
Into my study, where my books are."	Into my studie, ther as my bookes be."
When these worthy men went with me	Whan that thise worthy men wenten with me
Since I ordered you to make our supper,	Sith I yow bad oure soper for to make,
Almost an hour it is, I declare,	Almoost an houre it is, I undertake,
And said to him thus: "Is our supper ready?	And seyde hym thus: "Is redy oure soper?
This master called his squire to him,	To hym this maister called his squier,
But in his study, where his books are,	But in his studie, ther as his bookes be,
While they saw all this marvelous sight,	Whil they saugh al this sighte merveillous,
And yet moved they never out of the house,	And yet remoeved they nevere out of the hous,
And farewell! All our revel was gone.	And farewel! Al oure revel was ago.
Saw it was time, he clapped his two hands,	Saugh it was tyme, he clapte his handes two,
And when this master that wrought this magic	And whan this maister that this magyk wroughte
In which he himself danced, as he thought.	On which hymself he daunced, as hym thoughte.
That he showed him his lady in a dance,	That he hym shewed his lady on a daunce,
And after this he provided him such pleasure	And after this he dide hym swich plesaunce
That with their hawks have slain the heron.	That with hir haukes han the heron slayn.
These hunters with falcons upon a fair riverbank,	Thise fauconers upon a fair ryver,
He saw, when these wild deer were removed,	He saugh, whan voyded were thise wilde deer,
And some bled because of bitter wounds from arrows.	And somme with arwes blede of bittre woundes.
He saw a hundred of them slain by hounds,	He saugh of hem an hondred slayn with houndes,
The greatest that ever were seen with eye.	The gretteste that evere were seyn with ye.
There he saw harts with their high horns,	Ther saugh he hertes with hir hornes hye,
Forests, parks full of wild deer;	Forestes, parkes ful of wilde deer;
He showed him, before he went to supper,	He shewed hym, er he wente to sopeer,
So well appointed a house as this one was	So wel arrayed hous as ther was oon
They lacked no foods that might please them.	Hem lakked no vitaille that myghte hem plese.
Home to his house, and put them well at ease.	Hoom to his hous, and maden hem wel at ese.
And with this magician forth he is gone	And with this magicien forth is he gon
Down off his horse Aurelius alighted straightway,	Doun of his hors Aurelius lighte anon,
For which he wept very often many a tear.	For which he weep ful ofte many a teere.
And he answered him that they were dead,	And he answerde hym that they dede were,
Whom he had known in old days,	The whiche that he had knowe in olde dawes,
This Breton clerk asked him about fellows	This Briton clerk hym asked of felawes
And before they went any foot farther,	And er they ferther any foote wente,
"I know," he said, "the cause of your coming."	"I knowe," quod he, "the cause of youre comyng."
And after that he said a wonderful thing:	And after that he seyde a wonder thyng:
Who in Latin politely greeted them,	Which that in Latyn thriftily hem grette,
A young clerk roaming by himself they met,	A yong clerk romynge by hymself they mette,
Not more than two or three furlongs,	But if it were a two furlong or thre,
When they had come almost to that city,	Whan they were come almoost to that citee,
In hope to be relieved of his care.	In hope for to been lissed of his care.
And on his way forth then is he gone	And on his wey forthward thanne is he fare
And such encouragement he gave him to go	And swich confort he yaf hym for to gon
Unto his brother's bed he is come,	Unto his brotheres bed he comen is,
Why should I make a longer tale of this?	What sholde I make a lenger tale of this?
Or else he shall shame her at the least."	Or elles he shal shame hire atte leeste."
Then must she by necessity keep her promise,	Thanne moste she nedes holden hire biheste,
Then my brother would be cured of his woe;	Thanne were my brother warisshed of his wo;
And in such form endure a week or two.	And in swich forme enduren a wowke or two.
And ships by the shore come and go,	And shippes by the brynke comen and gon,
Of Brittany were removed every one,	Of Britaigne weren yvoyded everichon,
For with an apparition a clerk may make it seem,	For with an apparence a clerk may make,
He should well make my brother have his love.	He sholde wel make my brother han his love.
Or other natural science beyond that	Or oother magyk natureel above,
Who had these moon's stations in mind,	That hadde thise moones mansions in mynde,
At Orleans find some old fellow	At Orliens som oold felawe yfynde
"Now then conclude I thus: that if I might	"Now thanne conclude I thus: that if I myghte
Thus it seemed to every man's sight.	Thus semed it to every mannes sighte.
And when they pleased, they made it suddenly disappear.	And whan hem lyked, voyded it anon.
Sometimes a castle, all of mortar and stone;	Somtyme a castel, al of lym and stoon;
And sometimes flowers spring as in a field;	And somtyme floures sprynge as in a mede;
Sometimes a grim lion has seemed to come;	Somtyme hath semed come a grym leoun;
And in the hall row up and down.	And in the halle rowen up and doun.
Have made come in a water and a barge,	Have maad come in a water and a barge,
That illusionists within a large hall	That tregetours withinne an halle large
For often at feasts have I well heard say	For ofte at feestes have I wel herd seye
Such as these subtle illusionists play.	Swiche as thise subtile tregetoures pleye.
By which men make diverse illusions,	By whiche men make diverse apparences,
For I am sure that there are sciences	For I am siker that ther be sciences
And to himself he said secretly,	And to hymself he seyde pryvely:
Straightway for joy his heart began to dance,	Anon for joye his herte gan to daunce,
And when this book was in his remembrance,	And whan this book was in his remembraunce,
Does not allow any illusion to grieve us.	Ne suffreth noon illusioun us to greve.
For holy church's faith in our belief	For hooly chirches feith in oure bileve
As in our days is not worth a fly --	As in oure dayes is nat worth a flye --
That belong to the moon, and such folly	That longen to the moone, and swich folye
Concerning the eight and twenty stations	Touchynge the eighte and twenty mansiouns
Which book spoke much of the operations	Which book spak muchel of the operaciouns
Although he was there to learn another craft,	Al were he ther to lerne another craft,
Who was at that time a bachelor of law,	That was that tyme a bacheler of lawe,
Of natural science, which his fellow,	Of magyk natureel, which his felawe,
At Orleans in a study hall he saw a book	At Orliens in studie a book he say
He remembered that, one day,	He hym remembred that, upon a day,
To learn specialized branches of learning --	Particuler sciences for to lerne --
Seek in every nook and every cranny	Seken in every halke and every herne
To read arts that are arcane	To reden artes that been curious
As young clerks that are eager	As yonge clerkes that been lykerous
Until at the last he remembered,	Til atte laste hym fil in remembraunce,
His brother wept and wailed secretly,	His brother weep and wayled pryvely,
Unless one could touch the arrow or grasp it.	But men myghte touche the arwe or come therby.
In surgery the treatment is perilous,	In surgerye is perilous the cure,
And well you know that for a wound healed only on the surface	And wel ye knowe that of a sursanure
But in his heart ever was the sharp arrow.	But in his herte ay was the arwe kene.
His breast was unhurt, in outward appearance,	His brest was hool, withoute for to sene,
Than ever did Pamphilus for Galathee.	Than evere dide Pamphilus for Galathee.
Under his breast he bore it more secretly	Under his brest he baar it moore secree
For to no other creature, certainly,	For to noon oother creature, certeyn,
He knew of all this woe and all this suffering,	He knew of al this wo and al this werk,
Except from his brother, who was a clerk.	Save of his brother, which that was a clerk.
Nor had he any comfort in this time,	Ne confort in this tyme hadde he noon,
Before he could set a foot on the ground;	Er any foot he myghte on erthe gon;
Two years and more lay wretched Aurelius,	Two yeer and moore lay wrecche Aurelyus,
In suffering and in hellish torment	In langour and in torment furyus
And of the sick Aurelius I will tell.	And of the sike Aurelius wol I telle.
And thus in joy and bliss I let them dwell,	And thus in joye and blisse I lete hem dwelle,
He pays no attention to any such matter,	He noght entendeth to no swich mateere,
To her of love; he had of it no fear.	To hire of love; he hadde of it no doute.
If any person had spoken, while he was away,	If any wight hadde spoke, whil he was oute,
He not at all desired to be suspicious,	No thyng list hym to been ymaginatyf,
That loves thee as his own heart's life.	That loveth thee as his owene hertes lyf.
The vigorous knight, the worthy man of arms,	The fresshe knyght, the worthy man of armes,
That hast thy lusty husband in thine arms,	That hast thy lusty housbonde in thyne armes,
O blissful art thou now, thou Dorigen,	O blisful artow now, thou Dorigen,
Is come home, and other worthy men.	Is comen hoom, and othere worthy men.
Arveragus, with well-being and great honor,	Arveragus, with heele and greet honour,
Let him choose, for all I care, whether he will live or die.	Chese he, for me, wheither he wol lyve or dye.
I leave this woeful creature lying;	Lete I this woful creature lye;
Despaired in this torment and this thought	Dispeyred in this torment and this thoght
Caught him up and to bed he has him brought.	Up caughte hym and to bedde he hath hym broght.
His brother, who knew of his suffering,	His brother, which that knew of his penaunce,
And for a long time he lay in a trance.	And longe tyme he lay forth in a traunce.
And with that word he fell down in a faint,	And with that word in swowne he fil adoun,
And on my pain have some compassion."	And of my peyne have som compassioun."
Thy temple in Delphi I will barefoot seek.	Thy temple in Delphos wol I barefoot seke.
Or never more shall I win my lady.	Or nevere mo shal I my lady wynne.
Under the ground, in which Pluto dwells,	Under the ground, ther Pluto dwelleth inne,
Into her own dark region	Into hir owene dirke regioun
Pray her to sink every rock down	Prey hire to synken every rok adoun
To grant me my sovereign lady dear,	To graunte me my sovereyn lady deere,
And unless she agree in such manner	And but she vouche sauf in swich manere
And spring flood will last both night and day.	And spryng flood laste bothe nyght and day.
Then shall she be fully even with you always,	Thanne shal she been evene atte fulle alway,
I say, pray your sister that she go	I seye, preyeth your suster that she go
Pray her that she go at no faster speed as you;	Preye hire she go no faster cours than ye;
"Lord Phoebus, do this miracle for me.	"Lord Phebus, dooth this miracle for me.
`Keep your promise, the rocks are away.'	`Holdeth youre heste, the rokkes been aweye.'
Then certainly to my lady may I say,	Thanne certes to my lady may I seye,
And let this flood-tide endure for two years.	And lat this flood endure yeres tweyne.
The highest rock in Armorican Brittany;	The hyeste rokke in Armorik Briteyne;
That five fathoms at the least it rise above	That fyve fadme at the leeste it oversprynge
Pray her so great a high tide to bring	As preieth hire so greet a flood to brynge
That now at this next opposition (of the sun and moon)	That now next at this opposicion
Do this miracle, or make my heart break --	Do this miracle, or do myn herte breste --
Wherefore, lord Phoebus, this is my request --	Wherfore, lord Phebus, this is my requeste --
Both in the sea and rivers great and small.	Bothe in the see and ryveres moore and lesse.
To follow her, as she that is goddess	To folwen hire, as she that is goddesse
Just so the sea desires naturally	Right so the see desireth naturelly
For which she follows you very attentively,	For which she folweth yow ful bisily,
Is to be kindled and ignited by your fire,	Is to be quyked and lighted of youre fir,
You know well, lord, that just as her desire	Ye knowen wel, lord, that right as hir desir
(Though Neptune have godly dominion in the sea,	(Though Neptunus have deitee in the see,
Who of the sea is chief goddess and queen	That of the see is chief goddesse and queene
"Your blissful sister, Lucina the bright,	"Youre blisful suster, Lucina the sheene,
How I may be helped and in what manner.	How that I may been holpen and in what wyse.
Now grant that I may tell you	Now voucheth sauf that I may yow devyse
You can help me best (of anyone), except for my lady.	Ye may me helpen, save my lady, best.
For well I know, lord Phoebus, if you wish,	For wel I woot, lord Phebus, if yow lest,
Upon my dying heart have some pity.	Upon my dedly herte have som pitee.
Without guilt, unless thy kindness	Withoute gilt, but thy benignytee
On wretched Aurelius, who is as good as lost.	On wrecche Aurelie, which that am but lorn.
Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciful eye	Lord Phebus, cast thy merciable eighe
As thy astronomical position changes low or high,	As thyn herberwe chaungeth lowe or heighe,
To each of them its time and its season,	To ech of hem his tyme and his seson,
That gives, according to thy height (in the sky),	That yevest, after thy declinacion,
Of every plant, herb, tree, and flower,	Of every plaunte, herbe, tree, and flour,
He said, "Apollo, god and governor	He seyde, "Appollo, god and governour
Unto the gods, and first unto the sun:	Unto the goddes, and first unto the sonne:
With piteous heart he has begun his complaint	With pitous herte his pleynt hath he bigonne
For utter woe out of his wits he suddenly went.	For verray wo out of his wit he breyde.
And in his delirium said his prayer.	And in his ravyng seyde his orisoun.
And on his bare knees he set himself down,	And on his knowes bare he sette hym doun,
Up to the heaven his hands he did hold,	Up to the hevene his handes he gan holde,
He thought that he felt his heart grow cold.	Hym semed that he felte his herte colde.
He sees he can not escape from his death;	He seeth he may nat fro his deeth asterte;
He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart.	He to his hous is goon with sorweful herte.
Save only wretched Aurelius, alas!	Save oonly wrecche Aurelius, allas!
And home they go in joy and in pleasure,	And hoom they goon in joye and in solas,
For the horizon has bereft the sun of its light --	For th' orisonte hath reft the sonne his lyght --
Until the bright sun lost its hue;	Til that the brighte sonne loste his hewe;
But suddenly began to revel anew	But sodeynly bigonne revel newe
And knew nothing of this business,	And nothyng wiste of this conclusioun,
And in the garden paths roamed up and down,	And in the aleyes romeden up and doun,
Then came her other friends many a one,	Tho coome hir othere freendes many oon,
And with that word he turned away immediately.	And with that word he turned hym anon.
Then I must die of sudden horrible death."	Thanne moot I dye of sodeyn deth horrible."
"Madame," he said, "this would be an impossiblity!	"Madame," quod he, "this were an inpossible!
Woe was Aurelius when he heard this,	Wo was Aurelie whan that he this herde,
Aurelius very often bitterly sighs;	Aurelius ful ofte soore siketh;
Who has her body whenever he pleases?"	That hath hir body whan so that hym liketh?"
To go love another man's wife,	For to go love another mannes wyf,
What pleasure should a man have in his life	What deyntee sholde a man han in his lyf
Let such follies pass out of your heart.	Lat swiche folies out of youre herte slyde.
For well I know that it shall never happen.	For wel I woot that it shal never bityde.
"No, by that Lord," she said, "that made me!	"No, by that Lord," quod she, "that maked me!
"Is there no other grace in you?" he said.	"Is ther noon oother grace in yow?" quod he.
Then will I love you best of any man;	Thanne wol I love yow best of any man;
Of rocks that there is no stone seen,	Of rokkes that ther nys no stoon ysene,
I say, when you have made the coast so clean	I seye, whan ye han maad the coost so clene
So that they do not prevent ship nor boat to go --	That they ne lette ship ne boot to goon --
You remove all the rocks, stone by stone,	Ye remoeve alle the rokkes, stoon by stoon,
On whatever day that from end to end of Brittany	Looke what day that endelong Britayne
Since I see you so piteously lament.	Syn I yow se so pitously complayne.
Yet would I grant you to be your love,	Yet wolde I graunte yow to been youre love,
"Aurelius," she said, "by high God above,	"Aurelie," quod she, "by heighe God above,
Take this for my final answer."	Taak this for fynal answere as of me."
I will be his to whom that I am knit.	I wol been his to whom that I am knyt.
In word nor deed, so long as I have my wits;	In word ne werk, as fer as I have wit;
I shall never be an untrue wife	Ne shal I nevere been untrewe wyf
By that same God that gave me soul and life,	By thilke God that yaf me soule and lyf,
But now, Aurelius, I know your intention,	But now, Aurelie, I knowe youre entente,
Never before," she said, "Did I know what you meant.	Nevere erst," quod she, "ne wiste I what ye mente.
"Is this your desire," said she, "and say you thus?	"Is this youre wyl," quod she, "and sey ye thus?
She did look upon Aurelius;	She gan to looke upon Aurelius;
I have now no opportunity to say more;	I ne have as now no leyser moore to seye;
Here at your feet would God that I were buried!	Heere at youre feet God wolde that I were grave!
For with one word you may me slay or save.	For with a word ye may me sleen or save.
Madame, have pity upon my bitter pains;	Madame, reweth upon my peynes smerte;
My reward is but the breaking of my heart.	My gerdon is but brestyng of myn herte.
For well I know my service is in vain;	For wel I woot my servyce is in vayn;
Had went from where I should never have come back.	Hadde went ther nevere I sholde have come agayn.
Went over the sea, that I, Aurelius,	Wente over the see, that I, Aurelius,
I wish that day that your Arveragus	I wolde that day that youre Arveragus
"Madame," he said, "by God that this world made,	"Madame," quod he, "by God that this world made,
And when he saw his time, he said thus:	And whan he saugh his tyme, he seyde thus:
Unto his purpose drew Aurelius,	Unto his purpos drough Aurelius,
They fell in speech; and forth, more and more,	They fille in speche; and forth, moore and moore,
And (she) had known him for a long time,	And hadde yknowen hym of tyme yoore,
And was a man of good reputation and honor,	And was a man of worshipe and honour,
Because he was her neighbor,	By cause that he was hire neighebour,
Nonetheless it happened, before they went away,	Nathelees it happed, er they thennes wente,
But she knew nothing of his intent.	But nothyng wiste she of his entente.
It may well be he looked on her face	It may wel be he looked on hir face
Where young folk observe their customs (of courtship),	Ther yonge folk kepen hir observaunces,
Except that, by chance, sometimes at dances,	Save that, paraventure, somtyme at daunces,
He dared not reveal to her his woe,	Ne dorste he nat to hire his wo biwreye,
In other ways than you hear me say,	In oother manere than ye heere me seye,
For Narcissus, she who dared not tell her woe.	For Narcisus, that dorste nat telle hir wo.
And he must die, he said, as did Echo	And dye he moste, he seyde, as dide Ekko
But suffers as a fury does in hell;	But langwissheth as a furye dooth in helle;
(Saying) how he dared not his sorrow tell,	How that he dorste nat his sorwe telle,
Of such subject matter made he many lays,	Of swich matere made he manye layes,
He said he loved and was in no way loved in return	He seyde he lovede and was biloved no thyng.
His woe, as in a general lament;	His wo, as in a general compleynyng;
Except in his songs somewhat he would reveal	Save in his songes somwhat wolde he wreye
He was in despair; he dared say nothing,	He was despeyred; no thyng dorste he seye,
Copiously he drank all his penance (suffered intensely).	Withouten coppe he drank al his penaunce.
But he never dared tell her his grievance.	But nevere dorste he tellen hire his grevaunce.
Two years and more, as was his fate,	Two yeer and moore, as was his aventure,
Had loved her best of any creature	Hadde loved hire best of any creature
This lusty squire, servant to Venus,	This lusty squier, servant to Venus,
Unknown by this Dorigen at all,	Unwityng of this Dorigen at al,
And shortly, if I shall tell the truth,	And shortly, if the sothe I tellen shal,
And well beloved, and held in great esteem.	And wel biloved, and holden in greet prys.
Young, strong, very valiant, and rich, and wise,	Yong, strong, right vertuous, and riche, and wys,
One of the most handsome men alive;	Oon of the beste farynge man on lyve;
Therewith he was, if one should him describe,	Therwith he was, if men sholde hym discryve,
That is, or was, since the world began.	That is, or was, sith that the world bigan.
He sings, dances, passing any man	He syngeth, daunceth, passynge any man
Who was more lively and more gaily dressed,	That fressher was and jolyer of array,
Danced a squire before Dorigen,	Daunced a squier biforn Dorigen,
In this dance, among other men,	Upon this daunce, amonges othere men,
And with good hope let her sorrow slip away.	And with good hope lete hir sorwe slyde.
But nonetheless she must a time abide	But nathelees she moste a tyme abyde
Who was her husband and her love also.	That was hir housbonde and hir love also.
For she did not see him on the dance go	For she ne saugh hym on the daunce go
Who made always her complaint and her moan,	Which made alwey hir compleint and hir moone,
And sing also, save Dorigen alone,	And synge also, save Dorigen allone,
It was so full of beauty with pleasure.	So ful it was of beautee with plesaunce.
Or too great sorrow held it in distress,	Or to greet sorwe helde it in distresse,
That ever was born, unless too great sickness	That evere was born, but if to greet siknesse
Would have made any heart light	Wolde han maked any herte lighte
The odor of flowers and the fresh sight	The odour of floures and the fresshe sighte
Unless it were the true paradise.	But if it were the verray paradys.
That never was there garden of such worth	That nevere was ther gardyn of swich prys
Had adorned this garden, truly,	Arrayed hadde this gardyn, trewely,
And craft of man's hand so skillfully	And craft of mannes hand so curiously
Which May had painted with its soft showers	Which May hadde peynted with his softe shoures
And this was on the sixth morning of May,	And this was on the sixte morwe of May,
They go and amuse themselves all the long day.	They goon and pleye hem al the longe day.
For victuals and for other provisions,	Of vitaille and of oother purveiaunce,
In which they had made their arrangement	In which that they hadde maad hir ordinaunce
Unto a garden that was there nearby,	Unto a gardyn that was ther bisyde,
So on a day, early in the morning-tide,	So on a day, right in the morwe-tyde,
They dance and they play at chess and backgammon.	They dauncen and they pleyen at ches and tables.
And also in other delightful places;	And eek in othere places delitables;
And decide to amuse themselves somewhere else.	And shopen for to pleyen somwher elles.
To roam by the sea, but discomfort,	To romen by the see, but disconfort,
Her friends saw that it was no pleasure	Hire freendes sawe that it was no disport
Thus would she say, with many a piteous tear.	Thus wolde she seyn, with many a pitous teere.
These rocks slay my heart for fear."	Thise rokkes sleen myn herte for the feere."
Were sunk into hell for his sake!	Were sonken into helle for his sake!
But would God that all these black rocks	But wolde God that alle thise rokkes blake
To clerks I leave all disputation.	To clerkes lete I al disputison.
Keep my lord! This is my conclusion.	As kepe my lord! This my conclusion.
Though I can not know the causes.	Though I ne kan the causes nat yknowe.
By logical reasoning, that all is for the best,	By argumentz, that al is for the beste,
I know well clerks will say as they please,	I woot wel clerkes wol seyn as hem leste,
Which means do no good, but always cause trouble?	Whiche meenes do no good, but evere anoyen?
That you make such means to destroy it,	That ye swiche meenes make it to destroyen,
Toward mankind; but how then may it be	Toward mankynde; but how thanne may it bee
Then it seemed you had a great love	Thanne semed it ye hadde a greet chiertee
That thou made it like to thine own image.	That thou it madest lyk to thyn owene merk.
And this mankind is so fair a part of thy work	Which mankynde is so fair part of thy werk
A hundred thousand bodies of mankind	An hundred thousand bodyes of mankynde
See you not, Lord, how it destroys mankind?	Se ye nat, Lord, how mankynde it destroyeth?
It does no good, to my understanding, but does harm.	It dooth no good, to my wit, but anoyeth.
There is no benefit to man, nor bird, nor beast;	Ther nys yfostred man, ne bryd, ne beest;
For by this work, south, north, nor west, nor east,	For by this werk, south, north, ne west, ne eest,
Why have you created this unreasonable work?	Why han ye wroght this werk unresonable?
Of such a perfectly wise and stable God,	Of swich a parfit wys God and a stable,
Of work than any fair creation	Of werk than any fair creacion
That seem rather a foul confusion	That semen rather a foul confusion
Men say you make nothing in vain.	In ydel, as men seyn, ye no thyng make.
Leads the world by sure governance,	Ledest the world by certein governaunce,
"Eternal God, who through thy foreknowledge	"Eterne God, that thurgh thy purveiaunce
And say right thus, with sorrowful, cold sighs:	And seyn right thus, with sorweful sikes colde:
And piteously stare into the sea,	And pitously into the see biholde,
Then would she sit down upon the green,	Thanne wolde she sitte adoun upon the grene,
That on her feet she could not sustain herself.	That on hire feet she myghte hire noght sustene.
For sheer fear her heart would so quake	For verray feere so wolde hir herte quake
But when she saw the grisly black rocks,	But whan she saugh the grisly rokkes blake,
Another time there would she sit and think,	Another tyme ther wolde she sitte and thynke,
All cured of its bitter, sharp pains."	Al warisshed of his bittre peynes smerte."
Will bring home my lord? Then would my heart be	Wol bryngen hom my lord? Thanne were myn herte
"Is there no ship, of so many as I see,	"Is ther no ship, of so manye as I se,
For to herself full often, she says "Alas!",	For to hirself ful ofte, "Allas!" seith she,
But then was that a portion of her woe,	But thanne was that a parcel of hire wo,
Sailing their course, where it pleases them to go.	Seillynge hir cours, where as hem liste go.
Where she saw many a ship and sailing vessel	Where as she many a ship and barge seigh
To amuse herself upon the bank on high,	Hire to disporte upon the bank an heigh,
Now her castle stood close by the sea,	Now stood hire castel faste by the see,
For well she saw that it was for the best.	For wel she saugh that it was for the beste.
And finally she granted that request,	And finally she graunted that requeste,
Away to drive her dark imagining.	Awey to dryve hire derke fantasye.
To come and walk about in company,	To come and romen hire in compaignye,
And prayed her on their knees, for God's sake,	And preyde hire on knees, for Goddes sake,
Her friends saw her sorrow began to slacken	Hire freendes sawe hir sorwe gan to slake
Or else this sorrow would have slain her heart.	Or elles hadde this sorwe hir herte slayn.
And that he will come hastily again;	And that he wol come hastily agayn;
And also Arveragus, in (the midst of) all this care,	And eek Arveragus, in al this care,
She can not always continue in such passionate grief.	She may nat alwey duren in swich rage.
Through which her great sorrow began to be relieved;	Thurgh which hir grete sorwe gan aswage;
The imprint of their consolation,	The emprentyng of hire consolacioun,
Received has, by hope and by reason,	Receyved hath, by hope and by resoun,
So long have they comforted her until she	So longe han they conforted hire til she
Until some figure is imprinted upon it.	Til som figure therinne emprented be.
One may so long engrave on a stone	Men may so longe graven in a stoon
In the course of time, as every one of you knows,	By proces, as ye knowen everichoon,
They do to her with all their concern,	They doon to hire with al hire bisynesse,
And every comfort possible in this case	And every confort possible in this cas
That she slays herself without cause, alas!	That causelees she sleeth hirself, allas!
They preach to her, they tell her night and day	They prechen hire, they telle hire nyght and day
Comfort her in all that ever they can.	Conforten hire in al that ever they may.
Her friends, who knew her gloomy thought,	Hire freendes, whiche that knewe hir hevy thoght,
That all this wide world she reckoned as worth nothing.	That al this wyde world she sette at noght.
Desire of his presence so presses upon her	Desir of his presence hire so destreyneth
She mourns, stays awake, wails, fasts, complains;	She moorneth, waketh, wayleth, fasteth, pleyneth;
For his absence she weeps and sighs,	For his absence wepeth she and siketh,
Who loves her husband as her heart's life.	That loveth hire housbonde as hire hertes lyf.
And I will speak of Dorigen his wife,	And speken I wole of Dorigen his wyf,
Now will I stop (speaking) of this Arveragus,	Now wol I stynten of this Arveragus,
And dwelled there two years; the book says thus.	And dwelled there two yeer; the book seith thus.
For he set all his desire in such labor --	For al his lust he sette in swich labour --
To seek in arms good reputation and honor --	To seke in armes worshipe and honour --
In England, which was also called Britain,	In Engelond, that cleped was eek Briteyne,
Prepared himself to go and dwell a year or two	Shoop hym to goon and dwelle a yeer or tweyne
Until the knight of whom I thus speak,	Til that the knyght of which I speke of thus,
A year and more lasted this blissful life,	A yeer and moore lasted this blisful lyf,
That is between a husband and his wife?	That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf?
The joy, the ease, and the happiness	The joye, the ese, and the prosperitee
Who could tell, unless he had been wedded,	Who koude telle, but he hadde wedded be,
Where he lives in bliss and in pleasure.	Where as he lyveth in blisse and in solas.
Not far from Pedmark, where his dwelling was,	Nat fer fro Pedmark, ther his dwellyng was,
Home with his wife he goes to his country,	Hoom with his wyf he gooth to his contree,
And when he was in this happy state,	And whan he was in this prosperitee,
His lady, certainly, and his wife also,	His lady, certes, and his wyf also,
Since he has both his lady and his love;	Sith he hath bothe his lady and his love;
Servitude? Nay, but in lordship above,	Servage? Nay, but in lordshipe above,
Then was he both in lordship and servitude.	Thanne was he bothe in lordshipe and servage.
Servant in love, and lord in marriage.	Servant in love, and lord in mariage.
Thus has she taken her servant and her lord --	Thus hath she take hir servant and hir lord --
Here may men see a humble, wise accord;	Heere may men seen an humble, wys accord;
That never should there be fault in her.	That nevere sholde ther be defaute in here.
And she to him full truly did swear	And she to hym ful wisly gan to swere
And therefore has this wise, worthy knight,	And therfore hath this wise, worthy knyght,
By every person who knows about governance.	To every wight that kan on governaunce.
There must be moderation suitable to the occasion	After the tyme moste be temperaunce
On every wrong a man can not be avenged.	On every wrong a man may nat be wreken.
Causes (one) very often to do or speak amiss.	Causeth ful ofte to doon amys or speken.
Wine, woe, or changing of the balance of bodily humors	Wyn, wo, or chaungynge of complexioun
Ire, sickness, or the position of the stars,	Ire, siknesse, or constellacioun,
Who does not sometime do or speak amiss.	That he ne dooth or seith somtyme amys.
For in this world, certainly, there is no person	For in this world, certein, ther no wight is
Learn to suffer, or else, as I may walk (I swear),	Lerneth to suffre, or elles, so moot I goon,
One may not chide or complain for every word.	For every word men may nat chide or pleyne.
Things that rigor should never attain.	Thynges that rigour sholde nevere atteyne.
For it vanquishes, as these clerks say,	For it venquysseth, as thise clerkes seyn,
Patience is a noble virtue, certainly,	Pacience is an heigh vertu, certeyn,
He is in the best position, superior to all.	He is at his avantage al above.
Look who is most patient in love,	Looke who that is moost pacient in love,
And so do men, if I shall say the truth.	And so doon men, if I sooth seyen shal.
And not to be constrained like a slave;	And nat to been constreyned as a thral;
Love is a thing free as any spirit.	Love is a thyng as any spirit free.
Beats his wings, and farewell, he is gone!	Beteth his wynges, and farewel, he is gon!
When mastery comes, the God of Love immediately	Whan maistrie comth, the God of Love anon
Love will not be constrained by mastery.	Love wol nat been constreyned by maistrye.
If they will long hold company.	If they wol longe holden compaignye.
That friends must obey each other,	That freendes everych oother moot obeye,
For one thing, sirs, I dare say confidently,	For o thyng, sires, saufly dar I seye,
Thus are they both in quiet and in peace.	Thus been they bothe in quiete and in reste.
Have here my pledge -- until my heart bursts (until I die)."	Have heer my trouthe -- til that myn herte breste."
Through my fault, should be either war or strife.	As in my gilt, were outher werre or stryf.
And would God that never between us two,	Ne wolde nevere God bitwixe us tweyne,
You offer me to have such freedom from restraint,	Ye profre me to have so large a reyne,
She said, "Sir, since of your nobility	She seyde, "Sire, sith of youre gentillesse
She thanked him, and with full great humbleness	She thanked hym, and with ful greet humblesse
Which he would have to avoid bringing shame on his status (of knighthood).	That wolde he have for shame of his degree.
Except for the appearance of sovereignty,	Save that the name of soveraynetee,
As any lover to his lady should,	As any lovere to his lady shal,
But obey her, and follow her will in everything,	But hire obeye, and folwe hir wyl in al,
Should take upon himself any mastery	Ne sholde upon hym take no maistrie
That never in all his life he, day or night,	That nevere in al his lyf he, day ne nyght,
Of his free will he swore her as a knight	Of his free wyl he swoor hire as a knyght
And to lead the more blissfully their lives,	And for to lede the moore in blisse hir lyves,
Of such lordship as men have over their wives.	Of swich lordshipe as men han over hir wyves.
To take him for her husband and hir lord,	To take hym for hir housbonde and hir lord,
That privately she agreed with him	That pryvely she fil of his accord
Has taken such a pity on his suffering	Hath swich a pitee caught of his penaunce
And namely for his meek submission,	And namely for his meke obeysaunce,
Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.	Telle hire his wo, his peyne, and his distresse.
That this knight hardly dared, for fear,	That wel unnethes dorste this knyght, for drede,
And also moreover come of such noble ancestry	And eek therto comen of so heigh kynrede
For she was the fairest of all under the sun,	For she was oon the faireste under sonne,
He wrought for his lady before she was won.	He for his lady wroghte er she were wonne.
And many a labor, many a great chivalric exploit,	And many a labour, many a greet emprise,
To serve a lady in his best manner;	To serve a lady in his beste wise;
There was a knight that loved and worked hard	Ther was a knyght that loved and dide his payne
In Armorica, that is called Brittany,	In Armorik, that called is Britayne,
But if you wish, you shall hear my tale.	But if yow list, my tale shul ye heere.
My spirit feels nothing of such matter.	My spirit feeleth noght of swich mateere.
Colors of rhetoric (figures of speech) are strange to me;	Colours of rethoryk been to me queynte;
Or else such as men dye or paint.	Or elles swiche as men dye or peynte.
But such colors as grow in the field,	But swiche colours as growen in the mede,
Colors know I none, without doubt,	Colours ne knowe I none, withouten drede,
Nor learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.	Ne lerned Marcus Tullius Scithero.
I slept never on the Mount of Parnassus,	I sleep nevere on the Mount of Pernaso,
Thing that I speak, it must be bare and plain.	Thyng that I speke, it moot be bare and pleyn.
Have me excused for my rude speech.	Have me excused of my rude speche.
At my beginning first I you beseech,	At my bigynnyng first I yow biseche,
But, sirs, because I am an unlearned man,	But, sires, by cause I am a burel man,
Which I shall say with as good will as I can.	Which I shal seyn with good wyl as I kan.
And one of them have I in remembrance,	And oon of hem have I in remembraunce,
Or else read them for their pleasure;	Or elles redden hem for hir plesaunce;
Which lays with their instruments they sang	Whiche layes with hir instrumentz they songe
Rhymed in their first Breton tongue,	Rymeyed in hir firste Briton tonge,
Of diverse adventures made lays,	Of diverse aventures maden layes,
The Prologue of the Franklin's Tale	The Prologe of the Frankeleyns Tale
Here ends the Friar's Tale.	Heere endeth the Freres Tale.
Of their misdeeds, ere the fiend seize them!	Of hir mysdedes, er that the feend hem hente!
And pray that these summoners themselves repent	And prayeth that thise somonours hem repente
For Christ will be your champion and knight.	For Crist wol be youre champion and knyght.
He may not tempt you beyond your power,	He may nat tempte yow over youre myght,
The fiend, who would make you thrall and enslaved.	The feend, that yow wolde make thral and bonde.
Dispose always your hearts to withstand	Disposeth ay youre hertes to withstonde
To slay the innocent, if he can."	To sle the innocent, if that he may."
Hearken this word! Beware, as in this case:	Herketh this word! Beth war, as in this cas:
To protect us from the tempter Satan.	So kepe us fro the temptour Sathanas.
Keep vigil and pray Jesus for his grace	Waketh and preyeth Jhesu for his grace
But to keep us from that cursed place,	But for to kepe us fro that cursed place,
The pains of that cursed house of hell.	The peynes of thilke cursed hous of helle.
Though I could for a thousand years tell	Thogh that I myghte a thousand wynter telle
Even though no tongue can describe it,	Al be it so no tonge may it devyse,
Such pains that your hearts might tremble,	Swiche peynes that youre hertes myghte agryse,
And of our other doctors of the Church many a one,	And of oure othere doctours many oon,
Had I had been given time by this Summoner here,	Hadde I had leyser for this Somnour heere,
Gentlemen, I could have told you, said this Friar,	Lordynges, I koude han toold yow, quod this Frere,
And grant that these summoners become good men!	And leve thise somonours goode men bicome!
Mankind, save and guide us, one and all,	Mankynde, save and gyde us, alle and some,
And God, that made after his image	And God, that maked after his ymage
Where summoners have their heritage.	Where as that somonours han hir heritage.
Body and soul he with the devil went	Body and soule he with the devel wente
And with that word this foul fiend seized him;	And with that word this foule feend hym hente;
More than a Master of Divinity."	Moore than a maister of dyvynytee."
Thou shalt go with me to hell yet tonight,	Thou shalt with me to helle yet tonyght,
Thy body and this pan are mine by right.	Thy body and this panne been myne by right.
"Now, brother," said the devil, "be not angry;	"Now, brother," quod the devel, "be nat wrooth;
I would I had thy smock and every bit of your clothing!"	I wolde I hadde thy smok and every clooth!"
For any thing that I have had of thee.	For any thyng that I have had of thee.
Said this summoner, "to repent	Quod this somonour, "for to repente me
"Nay, old slut, that is not my intention,"	"Nay, olde stot, that is nat myn entente,"
And pan and all, unless he will repent!"	And panne and al, but he wol hym repente!"
"The devil," said she, "so fetch him ere he die,	"The devel," quod she, "so fecche hym er he deye,
"Now, Mabely, my own mother dear,	"Now, Mabely, myn owene mooder deere,
Upon her knees, he said in this manner,	Upon hir knees, he seyde in this manere,
And when the devil heard her so curse	And whan the devel herde hire cursen so
Give I thy body and my pan also!"	Yeve I thy body and my panne also!"
Unto the devil black and rough of appearance	Unto the devel blak and rough of hewe
Nor was I ever anything but true of my body!	Ne nevere I nas but of my body trewe!
Summoned unto your court in all my life;	Somoned unto youre court in al my lyf;
I was never ere now, widow nor wife,	Ne was I nevere er now, wydwe ne wyf,
"Thou lie!" said she, "by my salvation,	"Thou lixt!" quod she, "by my savacioun,
When thou madest thine husband cuckold,	Whan that thou madest thyn housbonde cokewold,
For debt which thou owest me since long ago.	For dette which thou owest me of old.
I will carry off thy new pan	As I wol bere awey thy newe panne
"Pay me," said he, "or by the sweet Saint Anne,	"Pay me," quod he, "or by the sweete Seinte Anne,
"Alas!" said she, "God knows, I have no guilt."	"Allas!" quod she, "God woot, I have no gilt."
If I excuse thee, though thou should be dead!"	If I th' excuse, though thou shul be spilt!"
"Nay then," said he, "the foul fiend me fetch	"Nay thanne," quod he, "the foule feend me fecche
Show your charity on me, poor wretch."	Kithe youre almesse on me, povre wrecche."
You know well that I am poor and old;	Ye knowen wel that I am povre and oold;
Though I should gain this wide world (if I had it),	This wyde world thogh that I sholde wynne,
Surely help me out of care and sin,	So wisly help me out of care and synne,
"Twelve pence!" said she, "Now, lady Saint Marie	"Twelf pens!" quod she, "Now, lady Seinte Marie
Give me twelve pens, I can no longer tarry."	Yif me twelf pens, I may no lenger tarye."
Hurry up, and let me ride hastily;	Com of, and lat me ryden hastily;
My master has the profit and not I.	My maister hath the profit and nat I.
I shall have no profit thereby but little;	I shal no profit han therby but lite;
Twelve pens to me, and I will thee acquit.	Twelf pens to me, and I wol thee acquite.
"Yes," said this summoner, "pay at once -- let's see --	"Yis," quod this somonour, "pay anon -- lat se --
And answer there by my representative	And answere there by my procuratour
May I not ask for a written copy of the charge, sir summoner,	May I nat axe a libel, sire somonour,
Without being dead, it so pains in my side.	But I be deed, so priketh it in my syde.
I can not walk so far," said she, "nor ride,	I may nat go so fer," quod she, "ne ryde,
I have been sick, and that full many a day.	I have been syk, and that ful many a day.
Surely help me, since I can not.	So wisly helpe me, as I ne may.
"Now, Lord," said she, "Christ Jesus, king of kings,	"Now, Lord," quod she, "Crist Jhesu, kyng of kynges,
To answer to the court about certain things."	T' answere to the court of certeyn thynges."
Tomorrow morning before the archdeacon's knee	Tomorn bifore the erchedeknes knee
"I have," said he, "here a writ of summons;	"I have," quod he, "of somonce here a bille;
God save you, sir, what is your sweet will?"	God save you, sire, what is youre sweete wille?"
"Who knocks?" said this wife, "bless me!	"Who clappeth?" seyde this wyf, "benedicitee!
I believe thou hast some friar or priest with thee."	I trowe thou hast som frere or preest with thee."
"Come out," said he, "thou old hag!	"Com out," quod he, "thou olde virytrate!
This summoner knocks at the widow's gate.	This somonour clappeth at the wydwes gate.
Earn thy living, learn here by my example."	Wynne thy cost, taak heer ensample of me."
But since thou can not, in this country,	But for thou kanst nat, as in this contree,
And yet, God knows, of her know I no vice.	And yet, God woot, of hire knowe I no vice.
I will have twelve pence, even if she be driven mad,	I wole han twelf pens, though that she be wood,
As to give up a penny of her goods.	As for to yeve a peny of hir good.
Who would be almost as willing to lose her neck	That hadde almoost as lief to lese hire nekke
"Brother," said he, "here dwells an old crone	"Brother," quod he, "heere woneth an old rebekke
This summoner to his brother began to whisper:	This somonour to his brother gan to rowne:
When they came a short way out of town,	Whan that they coomen somwhat out of towne,
Here gain I nothing from a tax on horse and cart."	Heere wynne I nothyng upon cariage."
Let us go forth on our undertaking;	Lat us go forth abouten oure viage;
The churl spoke one thing, but he thought another.	The carl spak oo thing, but he thoghte another.
"Lo, brother," said the fiend, "what told I thee?	"Lo, brother," quod the feend, "what tolde I thee?
Now is my cart out of the mud, by God!"	Now is my cart out of the slow, pardee!"
I pray God save thee, and Saint Loy!	I pray God save thee, and Seinte Loy!
That was well pulled, my own dappled boy.	That was wel twight, myn owene lyard boy.
And all his handiwork, both more and less!	And al his handwerk, bothe moore and lesse!
"Giddap! Now," said he, "may Jesus Christ you bless,	"Heyt! Now," quod he, "ther Jhesu Crist yow blesse,
And they began to pull and to stoop.	And they bigonne to drawen and to stoupe.
This carter whacks his horses upon the hindquarters,	This cartere thakketh his hors upon the croupe,
Or else wait a while, and thou shalt see."	Or elles stynt a while, and thou shalt see."
It is not his intention, trust me well.	It is nat his entente, trust me weel.
"Nay," said the devil, "God knows, never a bit!	"Nay," quod the devel, "God woot, never a deel!
Both hay and cart, and also his three horses."	Bothe hey and cart, and eek his caples thre."
Seize it at once, for he has given it to thee,	Hent it anon, for he hath yeve it thee,
Hearest thou not what the carter says?	Herestow nat how that the cartere seith?
"Hearken, my brother, hearken, by thy faith!	"Herkne, my brother, herkne, by thy feith!
Very discreetly, and whispered in his ear:	Ful prively, and rowned in his ere:
And nearer the fiend he drew, as if it were nothing,	And neer the feend he drough, as noght ne were,
This summoner said, "Here shall we have some fun."	This somonour seyde, "Heere shal we have a pley."
So much woe as I have with you suffered!	So muche wo as I have with yow tholed!
As surely as ever you were born,	As ferforthly as evere were ye foled,
The fiend," said he, "fetch you, body and bones,	The feend," quod he, "yow fecche, body and bones,
"Giddap, Brok! Giddap, Scot! Why do you stop pulling for the stones?	"Hayt, Brok! Hayt, Scot! What spare ye for the stones?
The carter smote and cried as if he were crazy,	The cartere smoot and cryde as he were wood,
Deep in mud was the road, for which the cart stood still.	Deep was the wey, for which the carte stood.
Which a carter drove forth in his way.	Which that a cartere droof forth in his wey.
They saw a cart that was loaded with hay,	They saugh a cart that charged was with hey,
To which this summoner planned to go	To which this somonour shoop hym for to wende,
And with that word they ride forth their way.	And with that word they ryden forth hir wey.
"I grant," said the devil, "by my faith."	"I graunte," quod the devel, "by my fey."
Let him be true and share it with his brother."	Lat hym be trewe and parte it with his brother."
And if one of us have more than the other,	And if that any of us have moore than oother,
And I shall mine; thus may we both live.	And I shal myn; thus may we bothe lyve.
Take thou thy part, whatever men will thee give,	Taak thou thy part, what that men wol thee yive,
And we both go about our acquisitions.	And bothe we goon abouten oure purchas.
To be true brother in this case;	For to be trewe brother in this cas;
As I am sworn, and each of us to the other,	As I am sworn, and ech of us til oother,
For though thou were the devil Satan,	For though thou were the devel Sathanas,
My troth will I keep, in this case.	My trouthe wol I holde, as in this cas.
I am a yeoman, as is very widely known;	I am a yeman, knowen is ful wyde;
"Nay," said this summoner, "that shall not happen!	"Nay," quod this somonour, "that shal nat bityde!
Until it be that thou forsake me."	Til it be so that thou forsake me."
For I will hold company with thee	For I wole holde compaignye with thee
Or Dante also. Now let us ride quickly,	Or Dant also. Now lat us ryde blyve,
Better than Virgil, while he was alive,	Bet than Virgile, while he was on lyve,
Be able in a professorial chair to lecture on this subject	Konne in a chayer rede of this sentence
Come where thou need not to learn from me,	Come there thee nedeth nat of me to leere,
Thou shalt hereafter, my brother dear,	Thou shalt herafterward, my brother deere,
Thou want especially to know how we are shaped;	Thou wolt algates wite how we been shape;
But one thing I warn thee, I will not deceive you:	But o thyng warne I thee, I wol nat jape:
I put no store in your theology.)	I do no fors of youre dyvynytee.)
(And yet will some men say it was not he;	(And yet wol som men seye it was nat he;
As to the Phitonissa (Witch of Endor) did Samuel.	As to the Phitonissa dide Samuel.
And speak as readily and faire and well	And speke as renably and faire and wel
With dead bodies, in very many manners,	With dede bodyes, in ful sondry wyse,
Of elements?" The fiend answered, "Nay.	Of elementz?" The feend answerde, "Nay.
Do you make yourself new bodies thus always	Make ye yow newe bodies thus alway
"Yet tell me," said the summoner, "truly,	"Yet tel me," quod the somonour, "feithfully,
And to the apostles I was also a servant."	And to the apostles servant eek was I."
As to the archbishop Saint Dunstan,	As to the erchebisshop Seint Dunstan,
And sometimes we are servants unto a man,	And somtyme be we servant unto man,
He should be saved, but that we wanted to seize him.	He sholde be sauf, but that we wolde hym hente.
Although it was not our intention	Al be it that it was nat oure entente
It is a cause of his salvation,	It is a cause of his savacioun,
And not his body, and all is for the best.	And nat his body, and al is for the beste.
A man and do his soul distress	Upon a man and doon his soule unreste
And sometimes we are allowed to harass	And somtyme be we suffred for to seke
This is to say, of soul and body as well.	This is to seyn, of soule and body eke.
And sometimes have we power over both of the two --	And somtyme han we myght of bothe two --
Take the evidence of Job, to whom we did woe.	Witnesse on Job, whom that we diden wo.
Only the body and not the soul to grieve;	Oonly the body and nat the soule greve;
And sometimes, at our prayer, have we leave	And somtyme, at oure prayere, han we leve
If he wishes to stand against us.	If that hym list to stonden ther-agayn.
In various methods and in various appearances.	In divers art and in diverse figures.
When he wishes, upon his creatures,	Whan that hym list, upon his creatures,
And means to do his commandments,	And meenes to doon his comandementz,
For sometimes we are God's instruments	For somtyme we been Goddes instrumentz
But, since thou askest why labor we --	But, for thou axest why labouren we --
To understand, even though I told them to thee.	To understonde, althogh I tolde hem thee.
For, brother mine, thy wit is all too bare	For, brother myn, thy wit is al to bare
And not attend to explaining our mental abilities.	And nat entende oure wittes to declare.
I will concentrate on profit, if I may,	I wol entende to wynnyng, if I may,
The day is short, and it is past nine a.m.,	The day is short, and it is passed prime,
Said this fiend, "but every thing has its time.	Seyde this feend, "but alle thyng hath tyme.
"Very many a cause, dear sir summoner,"	"Ful many a cause, leeve sire somonour,"
"What makes you to have all this labor?"	"What maketh yow to han al this labour?"
As are most suitable for taking our prey."	As moost able is oure preyes for to take."
"Because we," said he, "will make us such forms	"For we," quod he, "wol us swiche formes make
In various shapes, and not always in one?"	In sondry shap, and nat alwey in oon?"
"Why," said this summoner, "ride you then or walk about	"Why," quod this somonour, "ryde ye thanne or goon
And by God, yet I know more craft than he."	And pardee, yet kan I moore craft than he."
It is no wonderful thing though it be so;	It is no wonder thyng thogh it be so;
Or like an angel can I ride or walk about.	Or lyk an angel kan I ryde or go.
Sometimes like a man, or like an ape,	Somtyme lyk a man, or lyk an ape,
Or else make it seem to you we are so shaped;	Or elles make yow seme we been shape;
But when we like we can take us one,	But whan us liketh we kan take us oon,
"Nay, certainly," said he, "there have we none;	"Nay, certeinly," quod he, "ther have we noon;
In hell, where you are in your usual condition?"	In helle, ther ye been in youre estat?"
Have you then a definite form	Han ye a figure thanne determinat
You have a man's shape as well as I;	Ye han a mannes shap as wel as I;
"Ah!" said this summoner, "bless me! What say you?	"A!" quod this somonour, "benedicite! What sey ye?
Unto the world's end for a prey."	Unto the worldes ende for a preye."
Right so do I, for I would ride now	Right so fare I, for ryde wolde I now
To make a profit, thou carest never how;	To wynne good, thou rekkest nevere how;
Look how thou ridest for the same purpose,	Looke how thou rydest for the same entente,
What I acquire is the total of all my income.	My purchas is th'effect of al my rente.
To know whether men will give me any thing.	To wite wher men wol yeve me any thyng.
And here I ride about on my acquisition of profits,	And heere I ryde aboute my purchasyng,
I am a fiend; my dwelling is in hell,	I am a feend; my dwellyng is in helle,
This yeoman began a little to smile.	This yeman gan a litel for to smyle.
Said this summoner. Meanwhile	Quod this somonour. In this meene while
But, dear brother, tell me then thy name,"	But, leeve brother, tel me thanne thy name,"
Well are we met, by God and by Saint James!	Wel be we met, by God and by Seint Jame!
I curse these confessors every one.	I shrewe thise shrifte-fadres everychoon.
Stomach (compassion) nor conscience know I none;	Stomak ne conscience ne knowe I noon;
Nor of such tricks will I be confessed.	Ne of swiche japes wol I nat be shryven.
Were it not for my extortion, I could not live,	Nere myn extorcioun, I myghte nat lyven,
No sort of pangs of conscience for that have I.	No maner conscience of that have I.
Unless it be too heavy or too hot.	But if it be to hevy or to hoot.
I do not desist from taking anything, God knows,	I spare nat to taken, God it woot,
"Now certainly," said this Summoner, "I do the same.	"Now certes," quod this Somonour, "so fare I.
I can no better tell, truthfully."	I kan no bettre telle, feithfully."
From year to year I earn all my expenses.	Fro yeer to yeer I wynne al my dispence.
In every way, by trickery or by violence,	Algate, by sleyghte or by violence,
For truly, I take all that men will me give.	For sothe, I take al that men wol me yive.
And therefore by extortions I live.	And therfore by extorcions I lyve.
And my job is very hard work,	And myn office is ful laborous,
My wages are very scanty and very small.	My wages been ful streite and ful smale.
"I shall tell thee a true tale,	"As I shal tellen thee a feithful tale,
"Now, by my troth, brother dear," said he,	"Now, by my trouthe, brother deere," seyde he,
But as my brother tell me, how you do your business."	But as my brother tel me, how do ye."
And spare not for conscience nor sin,	And spareth nat for conscience ne synne,
In my occupation how I may most profit;	In myn office how that I may moost wynne;
Some trickery, and tell me faithfully	Som subtiltee, and tel me feithfully
Since you are a bailiff as am I,	Syn that ye been a baillif as am I,
Teach me, while we ride by the way,	Teche me, whil that we ryden by the weye,
That thou shalt never miss my house."	That of myn hous ne shaltow nevere mysse."
Ere we depart, I shall thee so well instruct	Er we departe, I shal thee so wel wisse
Where I hope some time I shall thee see.	Whereas I hope som tyme I shal thee see.
"Brother," said he, "far in the north country,	"Brother," quod he, "fer in the north contree,
This yeoman him answered in gentle words,	This yeman hym answerde in softe speche,
If I should seek you another day?"	Another day if that I sholde yow seche?"
"Brother," said he, "where is now your dwelling	"Brother," quod he, "where is now youre dwellyng
And ever inquiring about every thing,	And evere enqueryng upon every thyng,
As full of venom are these butcherbirds	As ful of venym been thise waryangles
In pleasant conversation they ride forth and amuse themselves.	In daliance they ryden forth and pleye.
To be sworn brothers until they die.	For to be sworne bretheren til they deye.
Each in other's hand pledges his troth,	Everych in ootheres hand his trouthe leith,
"Great thanks," said this summoner, "by my faith!"	"Grant mercy," quod this somonour, "by my feith!"
All shall be thine, just as thou wilt desire."	Al shal be thyn, right as thou wolt desire."
If thou happen to come in our shire,	If that thee happe to comen in oure shire,
I have gold and silver in my chest;	I have gold and silver in my cheste;
And also of brotherhood, if you wish.	And eek of bretherhede, if that yow leste.
Of thine acquaintance I would pray thee,	Of thyn aqueyntance I wolde praye thee,
Thou art a bailiff, and I am another.	Thou art a bailly, and I am another.
"By God," said this yeoman, "dear brother,	"Depardieux," quod this yeman, "deere broother,
Of the name, say that he was a summoner.	Seye that he was a somonour, for the name.
He dared not, for the true filth and shame	He dorste nat, for verray filthe and shame
"Art thou then a bailiff?" "Yes," said he.	"Artow thanne a bailly?" "Ye," quod he.
That belongs to my lord's due income."	That longeth to my lordes duetee."
To ride, to collect a rent	To ryden, for to reysen up a rente
Here close by," said he, "is my intention	Heere faste by," quod he, "is myn entente
This summoner him answered and said, "Nay;	This somnour hym answerde and seyde, "Nay;
Where ridest thou, alongside this green wood?"	Wher rydestow, under this grene-wode shawe?"
"Welcome," said he, "and every good fellow!	"Welcome," quod he, "and every good felawe!
"Sir," said this summoner, "hail, and well met!"	"Sire," quod this somnour, "hayl, and wel atake!"
A hat upon his head with fringes black.	An hat upon his heed with frenges blake.
He had upon him a short jacket of green,	He hadde upon a courtepy of grene,
A bow he bore, and arrows bright and keen;	A bowe he bar, and arwes brighte and kene;
A gay yeoman, alongside the edge of a forest.	A gay yeman, under a forest syde.
And it happened that he saw before him ride	And happed that he saugh bifore hym ryde
Pretending to have a case against her, for he wanted a bribe.	Feynynge a cause, for he wolde brybe.
This summoner, ever lying in ambush for his prey,	This somnour, evere waityng on his pray,
And it so befell that once on a day	And so bifel that ones on a day
Therefore on it he set all his intention.	Therfore on it he sette al his entente.
And because that was the best part of all his income,	And for that was the fruyt of al his rente,
Or an adulterer, or a concubine.	Or an avowtier, or a paramour.
Better than this summoner knew a sly lecher,	Bet than this somnour knew a sly lecchour,
That can know a hurt deer from a whole one	That kan an hurt deer from an hool yknowe
For in this world is no hunting dog	For in this world nys dogge for the bowe
Than is possible to tell in two years.	Than possible is to telle in yeres two.
I am thy friend, where I can help thee."	I am thy freend, ther I thee may availle."
Thou need trouble thyself no more in this case.	Thee thar namoore as in this cas travaille.
Have her stricken out of our records;	Do striken hire out of oure lettres blake;
Then would he say, "Friend, I shall for thy sake	Thanne wolde he seye, "Freend, I shal for thy sake
And rob the man, and let the wench go.	And pile the man, and lete the wenche go.
And summon both of them to the archdeacon's court,	And somne hem to chapitre bothe two,
And he would fetch a forged court order,	And he wolde fecche a feyned mandement,
Thus were the wench and he in agreement,	Thus was the wenche and he of oon assent,
That lay by them, they told it in his ear.	That lay by hem, they tolde it in his ere.
That, whether sir Robert or sir Huwe,	That, wheither that sir Robert or sir Huwe,
He had also wenches in his employ,	He hadde eek wenches at his retenue,
A thief, and also a summoner, and a pimp.	A theef, and eek a somnour, and a baude.
He was, if I shall give him his due praise,	He was, if I shal yeven hym his laude,
His master had but half the amount due to him.	His maister hadde but half his duetee.
And was a thief, exactly such a thief was he;	And was a theef, right swich a theef was he;
And just as Judas had small amounts of the apostles' money,	And right as Judas hadde purses smale,
And make him great feasts at the ale-house.	And make hym grete feestes atte nale.
And they were glad to fill his purse	And they were glade for to fille his purs
Without an actual summons an ignorant man	Withouten mandement a lewed man
His master knew not always what he earned.	His maister knew nat alwey what he wan.
He got himself a great profit in this way;	He took hymself a greet profit therby;
They were secretly his agents.	They weren his approwours prively.
For their acquaintance was not come recently.	For hire acqueyntance was nat come of newe.
Who told him all the secrets that they knew,	That tolde hym al the secree that they knewe,
As any hawk to come to the lure in England,	As any hauk to lure in Engelond,
Had always pimps as ready to his hand,	Hadde alwey bawdes redy to his hond,
This false thief, this summoner, said the Friar,	This false theef, this somonour, quod the Frere,
Now tell forth, though the Summoner loudly complain;	Now telleth forth, thogh that the Somonour gale;
Thus said our Host, "and let him tell his tale.	Thus seyde oure Hoost, "and lat hym telle his tale.
"Quiet! with bad luck and with misfortune to you!"	"Pees! with myschance and with mysaventure!"
Said the Summoner, "put out of our jurisdiction!"	Quod the Somonour, "yput out of oure cure!"
"By St. Peter! so are women of the brothels,"	"Peter! so been wommen of the styves,"
Nor never shall, until the end of all their lives.	Ne nevere shullen, terme of alle hir lyves.
They have over us no jurisdiction,	They han of us no jurisdiccioun,
For we are exempt from his authority.	For we are out of his correccioun.
To tell his wickedness I will not desist;	To telle his harlotrye I wol nat spare;
To direct him to four and twenty more.	To techen hym to foure and twenty mo.
He could spare one or two of the lechers,	He koude spare of lecchours oon or two,
That showed him well where there might be profit for him.	That taughte hym wel wher that hym myghte availle.
For deviously he had his network of spies,	For subtilly he hadde his espiaille,
No one in England was a more clever rascal;	A slyer boye nas noon in Engelond;
He had a summoner ready at his hand;	He hadde a somonour redy to his hond;
Power to have them punished.	Power to doon on hem correccioun.
Then had he, throughout his jurisdiction,	Thanne hadde he, thurgh his jurisdiccioun,
They were in the archdeacon's book.	They weren in the erchedeknes book.
He made the people piteously to sing out in pain,	He made the peple pitously to synge,
For small tithes and for small offering	For smale tithes and for smal offrynge
There could escape him no monetary punishment (fine).	Ther myghte asterte hym no pecunyal peyne.
If any parson would complain about them.	If any persoun wolde upon hem pleyne.
And those who paid less than full tithes were severely punished,	And smale tytheres weren foule yshent,
They had to sing out in pain if they were taken;	They sholde syngen if that they were hent;
But certainly, to lechers did he the greatest woe;	But certes, lecchours dide he grettest wo;
Of usury, and of simony also.	Of usure, and of symonye also.
Of marriage contracts and of failure to take the sacraments,	Of contractes and of lakke of sacramentz,
Of defamation of character, and adultery,	Of diffamacioun, and avowtrye,
Of witchcraft, and also of pandering,	Of wicchecraft, and eek of bawderye,
In punishment of fornication,	In punysshynge of fornicacioun,
That boldly carried out the law	That boldely dide execucioun
An archdeacon, a man of high rank,	An erchedeken, a man of heigh degree,
Once there was dwelling in my country	Whilom ther was dwellynge in my contree
Here begins the Friar's Tale	Heere bigynneth the Freres Tale
"Tell forth your tale, beloved master dear."	"Tel forth youre tale, leeve maister deere."
And after this he said unto the Friar,	And after this he seyde unto the Frere,
And how he does his job I shall tell him, indeed."	And his office I shal hym telle, ywis."
Which need not be told at this time;	Which nedeth nat rehercen at this tyme;
And of many another sort of crime	And of many another manere cryme
It is to be a flattering licensed beggar,	It is to be a flaterynge lymytour,
I shall tell him what a great honor	I shal hym tellen which a greet honour
By God, I shall pay him back every groat (fourpence).	By God, I shal hym quiten every grot.
Whatever he pleases; when it comes to my turn,	What so hym list; whan it comth to my lot,
"Nay," said the Summoner, "let him say to me	"Nay," quod the Somonour, "lat hym seye to me
Tell your tale, and leave the Summoner alone."	Telleth youre tale, and lat the Somonour be."
And courteous, as (befits) a man of your rank;	And curteys, as a man of youre estaat;
Our Host then spoke, "Ah, sir, you should be polite	Oure Hoost tho spak, "A, sire, ye sholde be hende
And is beaten (and driven away) at every town's end."	And is ybet at every townes ende."
With summonses for fornication,	With mandementz for fornicacioun,
A summoner is a runner up and down	A somonour is a rennere up and doun
I pray that none of you be displeased.	I praye that noon of you be yvele apayd.
That no good may be said of a summoner;	That of a somonour may no good be sayd;
By God, you can easily tell by the name	Pardee, ye may wel knowe by the name
I will tell you an amusing tale about a summoner.	I wol yow of a somonour telle a game.
To preaching and to the universities.	To prechyng and to scoles of clergye.
And leave authoritative texts, in God's name,	And lete auctoritees, on Goddes name,
We need not speak of anything but pleasant matters,	Us nedeth nat to speken but of game,
But, my lady, here as we ride by the way,	But, dame, heere as we ryde by the weye,
You have said many things right well, I say;	Ye han seyd muche thyng right wel, I seye;
On academic problems of great difficulty.	In scole-matere greet difficultee.
You have here touched, as I may prosper,	Ye han heer touched, also moot I thee,
"My lady," said he, "God give you a right good life!	"My lady," said he, "God give you a right good life!
"Dame," quod he, "God yeve yow right good lyf!	But atte laste he seyde unto the wyf,
At the Summoner, but for propriety	Upon the Somonour, but for honestee
He always made a kind of scowling face	He made alwey a maner louryng chiere
This worthy licensed beggar, this noble Friar	This worthy lymytour, this noble Frere,
The Prologue of the Friar's Tale.	The Prologe of the Freres Tale.
To tell his tale straightway, and said as you may hear.	His tale anon, and seyde as ye may heere.
And he began with a truly merry demeanor	And he bigan with right a myrie cheere
And with that word we rode forth on our way,	And with that word we ryden forth oure weye,
Now let us ride, and listen to what I say."	Now lat us ryde, and herkneth what I seye."
What! Welcome be the draw, in God's name!	What, welcome be the cut, a Goddes name!
To keep his agreement by his free assent,	To kepe his foreward by his free assent,
Like one who was wise and obedient	As he that wys was and obedient
And when this good man saw that it was so,	And whan this goode man saugh that it was so,
As you have heard; what more words are needed?	As ye han herd; what nedeth wordes mo?
By our previous promise and by formal agreement,	By foreward and by composicioun,
And he must tell his tale, as was reasonable,	And telle he moste his tale, as was resoun,
For which everyone was very happy and glad,	Of which ful blithe and glad was every wyght,
The truth is this: the draw fell to the Knight,	The sothe is this: the cut fil to the Knyght,
Were it by chance, or destiny, or luck,	Were it by aventure, or sort, or cas,
Every person began straightway to draw,	Anon to drawen every wight bigan,
And study not; lay hand to (draw a straw), every man!"	Ne studieth noght; ley hond to, every man!"
And you, sir Clerk, let be your modesty,	And ye, sire Clerk, lat be youre shamefastnesse,
Come nearer," he said, "my lady Prioress.	Cometh neer," quod he, "my lady Prioresse.
Now draw a straw, for that is my decision.	Now draweth cut, for that is myn accord.
Sir Knight," said he, "my master and my lord,	Sire Knyght," quod he, "my mayster and my lord,
He who has the shortest shall begin.	He which that hath the shorteste shal bigynne.
Now draw straws, before we depart further (from London);	Now draweth cut, er that we ferrer twynne;
Shall pay for all that is spent by the way.	Shal paye for al that by the wey is spent.
As ever I may drink wine or ale,	As evere mote I drynke wyn or ale,
Let's see now who shall tell the first tale.	Lat se now who shal telle the firste tale.
If what you said last night agrees with what you say this morning,	If even-song and morwe-song accorde,
You know your agreement, and I remind you of it.	Ye woot youre foreward, and I it yow recorde.
And said, "Gentlemen, listen, if you please.	And seyde, "Lordynges, herkneth, if yow leste.
And there our Host stopped his horse	And there oure Hoost bigan his hors areste
Unto the Watering of Saint Thomas;	Unto the Wateryng of Seint Thomas;
And forth we rode at little more than a walk	And forth we riden a litel moore than paas
And gathered us together all in a flock,	And gadrede us togidre alle in a flok,
In the morning, when day began to spring,	Amorwe, whan that day bigan to sprynge,
Without any longer tarrying.	Withouten any lenger taryynge.
We drank, and each one went to rest,	We dronken, and to reste wente echon,
And thereupon the wine was fetched immediately;	And therupon the wyn was fet anon;
We are accorded to his judgment.	We been acorded to his juggement.
In every respect; and thus unanimously	In heigh and lough; and thus by oon assent
And we will be ruled as he wishes	And we wol reuled been at his devys
And set a supper at a certain price,	And sette a soper at a certeyn pris,
And judge and score keeper of our tales,	And of oure tales juge and reportour,
That he would consent to do so,	That he wolde vouche sauf for to do so,
With very glad hearts, and (we) prayed him also	With ful glad herte, and preyden hym also
This thing was granted, and our oaths sworn	This thyng was graunted, and oure othes swore
And I will get ready early for this."	And I wol erly shape me therfore."
Tell me straightway, without more words,	Tel me anon, withouten wordes mo,
And if you grant that it be so,	And if ye vouche sauf that it be so,
Shall pay all that we spend by the way.	Shal paye al that we spenden by the weye.
And whosoever will not accept my judgment	And whoso wole my juggement withseye
Entirely at my own cost, and be your guide;	Right at myn owene cost, and be youre gyde;
And to make you the more merry,	And for to make yow the moore mury,
When we come back from Canterbury.	Whan that we come agayn fro Caunterbury.
Here in this place, sitting by this post,	Heere in this place, sittynge by this post,
Shall have a supper at the cost of us all	Shal have a soper at oure aller cost
Tales of best moral meaning and most pleasure --	Tales of best sentence and moost solaas --
That is to say, who tells in this case	That is to seyn, that telleth in this caas
And whoever of you who does best of all --	And which of yow that bereth hym best of alle --
About adventures that in old times have happened.	Of aventures that whilom han bifalle.
And on the homeward trip he shall tell two others,	And homward he shal tellen othere two,
Must tell two tales in this journey	In this viage shal telle tales tweye
That each of yow, to make our way seem short by this means,	That ech of yow, to shorte with oure weye,
This is the point, to speak briefly and clearly,	This is the poynt, to speken short and pleyn,
But, I pray yow, do not take it in disdain (scorn it).	But taak it nought, I prey yow, in desdeyn.
"Gentlemen," said he, "now listen for the best course of action;	"Lordynges," quod he, "now herkneth for the beste;
And asked him to say his decision as it pleased him.	And bad him seye his voirdit as hym leste.
And (we) granted his request without more discussion,	And graunted hym withouten moore avys,
It seemed to us it was not worthwhile to deliberate on it,	Us thoughte it was noght worth to make it wys,
Our decision was not long to seek out.	Oure conseil was nat longe for to seche.
Unless you be merry, I will give you my head!	But ye be myrie, I wol yeve yow myn heed!
Now, by the soul of my father who is dead,	Now, by my fader soule that is deed,
Tomorrow, when you ride by the way,	Tomorwe, whan ye riden by the weye,
And to do as I shall tell you,	And for to werken as I shal yow seye,
To be subject to my judgment,	For to stonden at my juggement,
And if pleases you all unanimously	And if yow liketh alle by oon assent
As I said before, and provide you some pleasure.	As I seyde erst, and doon yow som confort.
And therefore I will make a game for you,	And therfore wol I maken yow disport,
To ride by the way dumb as a stone;	To ride by the weye doumb as a stoon;
You intend to tell tales and to amuse yourselves;	Ye shapen yow to talen and to pleye;
And well I know, as you go by the way,	And wel I woot, as ye goon by the weye,
May the blessed martyr give you your reward!	The blisful martir quite yow youre meede!
"You go to Canterbury -- God give you success,	"Ye goon to Caunterbury -- God yow speede,
To give you pleasure, and it shall cost nothing.	To doon yow ese, and it shal coste noght.
And I have just now thought of an amusement,	And of a myrthe I am right now bythoght,
I would gladly make you happy, if I knew how.	Fayn wolde I doon yow myrthe, wiste I how.
At one time in this lodging as is (here) now.	Atones in this herberwe as is now.
I saw not this year so merry a company	I saugh nat this yeer so myrie a compaignye
You are right heartily welcome to me;	Ye been to me right welcome, hertely;
And said thus: "Now, gentlemen, truly,	And seyde thus: "Now, lordynges, trewely,
When we had paid our bills,	Whan that we hadde maad oure rekenynges,
And spoke of mirth among other things,	And spak of myrthe amonges othere thynges,
And after supper he began to be merry,	And after soper pleyen he bigan,
Also moreover he was a right merry man;	Eek therto he was right a myrie man;
And he lacked nothing at all of the qualities proper to a man.	And of manhod hym lakkede right naught.
Bold of his speech, and wise, and well mannered,	Boold of his speche, and wys, and wel ytaught,
There was no better business man in Cheapside --	A fairer burgeys was ther noon in Chepe --
(Qualified) to be a master of ceremonies in a hall.	For to been a marchal in an halle.
OUR HOST was an impressive man indeed	A semely man OURE HOOSTE was withalle
The wine was strong, and it well pleased us to drink.	Strong was the wyn, and wel to drynke us leste.
He served us with victuals of the best sort;	He served us with vitaille at the beste;
And to the supper he set us straightway.	And to the soper sette he us anon.
Our Host made great hospitality to everyone of us,	Greet chiere made oure Hoost us everichon,
My wit is short, you can well understand.	My wit is short, ye may wel understonde.
Here in this tale, as they should stand.	Heere in this tale, as that they sholde stonde.
Although I have not set folk in order of their rank	Al have I nat set folk in hir degree
The words must be closely related to the deed.	The wordes moote be cosyn to the dede.
Also Plato says, whosoever knows how to read him,	Eek Plato seith, whoso kan hym rede,
And you know well it is no rudeness.	And wel ye woot no vileynye is it.
Christ himself spoke very plainly in holy writ,	Crist spak hymself ful brode in hooly writ,
He must as well say one word as another.	He moot as wel seye o word as another.
He may not refrain from (telling the truth), although he were his brother;	He may nat spare, althogh he were his brother;
Or make up things, or find new words.	Or feyne thyng, or fynde wordes newe.
Or else he must tell his tale inaccurately,	Or ellis he moot telle his tale untrewe,
Although he may speak ever so rudely and freely,	Al speke he never so rudeliche and large,
He must repeat as closely as ever he knows how	He moot reherce as ny as evere he kan
Whoever must repeat a story after someone,	Whoso shal telle a tale after a man,
For this you know as well as I:	For this ye knowen al so wel as I:
Nor though I speak their words accurately.	Ne thogh I speke hir wordes proprely.
To tell you their words and their behavior,	To telle yow hir wordes and hir cheere,
Though I speak plainly in this matter,	Thogh that I pleynly speke in this mateere,
That you do not attribute it to my rudeness,	That ye n' arette it nat my vileynye,
But first I pray yow, of your courtesy,	But first I pray yow, of youre curteisye,
And all the rest of our pilgrimage.	And al the remenaunt of oure pilgrimage.
When we had arrived in that hostelry;	Whan we were in that hostelrie alyght;
How we conducted ourselves that same night,	How that we baren us that ilke nyght,
But now it is time to tell to you	But now is tyme to yow for to telle
That is called the Tabard, close by the Bell.	That highte the Tabard, faste by the Belle.
In Southwark at this fine hostelry	In Southwerk at this gentil hostelrye
Why this company was assembled	Why that assembled was this compaignye
The rank, the dress, the number, and also the cause	Th' estaat, th' array, the nombre, and eek the cause
Now have I told you truly, briefly,	Now have I toold you soothly, in a clause,
Therefore he sang the more merrily and loud.	Therefore he song the murierly and loude.
He must preach and well smooth his speech	He moste preche and wel affile his tonge
For he knew well, when that song was sung,	For wel he wiste, whan that song was songe,
But best of all he sang an Offertory;	But alderbest he song an offertorie;
He well knew how to read a lesson or a story,	Wel koude he rede a lessoun or a storie,
He was in church a noble ecclesiast.	He was in chirche a noble ecclesiaste.
But truly to tell at the last,	But trewely to tellen atte laste,
He made fools of the parson and the people.	He made the person and the peple his apes.
And thus, with feigned flattery and tricks,	And thus, with feyned flaterye and japes,
Than the parson got in two months;	Than that the person gat in monthes tweye;
A poor parson dwelling in the countryside,	A povre person dwellynge upon lond,
But with these relics, when he found	But with thise relikes, whan that he fond
And in a glass container he had pigs' bones.	And in a glas he hadde pigges bones.
He had a cross of latten (brass-like alloy) covered with stones,	He hadde a croys of latoun ful of stones,
Upon the sea, until Jesus Christ took him.	Upon the see, til Jhesu Crist hym hente.
That Saint Peter had, when he went	That Seint Peter hadde, whan that he wente
He said he had a piece of the sail	He seyde he hadde a gobet of the seyl
Which he said was Our Lady's veil;	Which that he seyde was Oure Lady veyl;
For in his pouch he had a pillow-case,	For in his male he hadde a pilwe-beer,
But as to his craft, from Berwick to Ware	But of his craft, fro Berwyk into Ware
I believe he was a eunuch or a homosexual.	I trowe he were a geldyng or a mare.
It (his face) was as smooth as if it were recently shaven.	As smothe it was as it were late shave.
He had no beard, nor never would have;	No berd hadde he, ne nevere sholde have;
He had a voice as small as a goat has.	A voys he hadde as smal as hath a goot.
Brimful of pardons come all fresh from Rome.	Bretful of pardoun comen from Rome al hoot.
Before him in his lap, (he had) his knapsack,	His walet, biforn hym in his lappe,
He had sewn a Veronica upon his cap.	A vernycle hadde he sowed upon his cappe.
He had glaring eyes such as has a hare.	Swiche glarynge eyen hadde he as an hare.
It seemed to him that he rode in the very latest style;	Hym thoughte he rood al of the newe jet;
For it was trussed up in his knapsack.	For it was trussed up in his walet.
But to make an attractive appearance, he wore no hood,	But hood, for jolitee, wered he noon,
But thin it lay, by strands one by one.	But thynne it lay, by colpons oon and oon.
And he spread them over his shoulders;	And therwith he his shuldres overspradde;
By small strands hung such locks as he had,	By ounces henge his lokkes that he hadde,
But smooth it hung as does a clump of flax;	But smothe it heeng as dooth a strike of flex;
This Pardoner had hair as yellow as wax,	This Pardoner hadde heer as yelow as wex,
There was never a trumpet of half so great a sound.	Was nevere trompe of half so greet a soun.
Very loud he sang "Come hither, love, to me!"	Ful loude he soong "Com hider, love, to me!"
Who had come straight from the court of Rome.	That streight was comen fro the court of Rome.
Of Rouncivale, his friend and his companion,	Of Rouncivale, his freend and his compeer,
With him there rode a fine PARDONER	With hym ther rood a gentil PARDONER
He had made himself a shield of a cake.	A bokeleer hadde he maad hym of a cake.
As large as if it were for the sign of a tavern	As greet as it were for an ale-stake.
He had set a garland upon his heed,	A gerland hadde he set upon his heed,
And knew their secrets, and was the adviser of them all.	And knew hir conseil, and was al hir reed.
The young people of the diocese,	The yonge girles of the diocise,
And let him also beware of a Significavit (order for imprisonment).	And also war hym of a Significavit.
For excommunication will slay just as forgiveness saves,	For curs wol slee right as assoillyng savith,
Each guilty man ought to be afraid of excommunication,	Of cursyng oghte ech gilty man him drede,
But well I know he lied right certainly;	But wel I woot he lyed right in dede;
"Purse is the archdeacon's hell," he said.	"Purs is the ercedekenes helle," seyde he.
For in his purse he would be punished.	For in his purs he sholde ypunysshed be.
Unless a man's soul were in his purse;	But if a mannes soule were in his purs;
Of the archdeacon's curse (of excommunication) in such a case,	In swich caas of the ercedekenes curs,
He would teach him to have no awe	He wolde techen him to have noon awe
Secretly he also knew how to pull off a clever trick.	Ful prively a fynch eek koude he pulle.
For twelve months, and excuse him completely;	A twelf month, and excuse hym atte fulle;
A good fellow to have his concubine	A good felawe to have his concubyn
For a quart of wine he would allow	He wolde suffre for a quart of wyn
One could not find a better fellow.	A bettre felawe sholde men noght fynde.
He was a fine rascal and a kind one;	He was a gentil harlot and a kynde;
Always "The question is, what point of the law applies?" he would cry.	Ay "Questio quid iuris" wolde he crie.
(Would find that) he had used up all his learning;	Thanne hadde he spent al his philosophie;
But whoever knew how to examine him in other matters,	But whoso koude in oother thyng hym grope,
And also you know well how a jay	And eek ye knowen wel how that a jay
That is no wonder, he heard it all the day;	No wonder is, he herde it al the day;
That he had learned out of some text of ecclesiastical law --	That he had lerned out of som decree --
He had a few legal terms, two or three,	A fewe termes hadde he, two or thre,
Then he would speak no word but Latin.	Thanne wolde he speke no word but Latyn.
And when he had drunk deeply of the wine,	And whan that he wel dronken hadde the wyn,
Then he would speak and cry out as if he were crazy.	Thanne wolde he speke and crie as he were wood.
And to drink strong wine, red as blood;	And for to drynken strong wyn, reed as blood;
He well loved garlic, onions, and also leeks,	Wel loved he garleek, oynons, and eek lekes,
That could cure him of his white pustules,	That hym myghte helpen of his whelkes white,
Nor ointment that would cleanse and burn,	Ne oynement that wolde clense and byte,
Borax, white lead, nor any oil of tarter,	Boras, ceruce, ne oille of tartre noon,
There was no mercury, lead monoxide, nor sulphur,	Ther nas quyk-silver, lytarge, ne brymstoon,
Children were afraid of his face.	Of his visage children were aferd.
With black, scabby brows and a beard with hair fallen out.	With scalled browes blake and piled berd.
He was as hot and lecherous as a sparrow,	As hoot he was and lecherous as a sparwe,
For it was pimpled and discolored, with swollen eyelids.	For saucefleem he was, with eyen narwe.
Who had a fire-red cherubim's face,	That hadde a fyr-reed cherubynnes face,
And ever he rode as the last of our company.	And evere he rood the hyndreste of oure route.
He had his coat hitched up and belted, like a friar,	Tukked he was as is a frere aboute,
Near to a town men call Bawdeswelle.	Biside a toun men clepen Baldeswelle.
Of Northfolk was this Reeve of whom I tell,	Of Northfolk was this Reve of which I telle,
And by his side he wore a rusty sword.	And by his syde he baar a rusty blade.
He had on a long outer coat of dark blue,	A long surcote of pers upon he hade,
That was all dapple gray and was called Scot.	That was al pomely grey and highte Scot.
This Reeve sat upon a very good horse	This Reve sat upon a ful good stot
He was a very good craftsman, a carpenter.	He was a wel good wrighte, a carpenter.
And have thanks, and also a coat and hood (as a reward).	And have a thank, and yet a cote and hood.
By giving and lending him some of his lord's own possessions,	To yeve and lene hym of his owene good,
He well knew how to please his lord subtly,	His lord wel koude he plesen subtilly,
He was secretly very richly provided.	Ful riche he was astored pryvely.
He could buy property better than his lord could.	He koude bettre than his lord purchace.
His place was shaded by green trees.	With grene trees yshadwed was his place.
His dwelling was very nicely situated upon an heath;	His wonyng was ful faire upon an heeth;
They were afraid of him as of the plague.	They were adrad of hym as of the deeth.
Whose trickery and treachery he did not know;	That he ne knew his sleighte and his covyne;
There was no man who could find him in arrears.	Ther koude no man brynge hym in arrerage.
Since his lord was twenty years of age.	Syn that his lord was twenty yeer of age.
And in accord with his contract he gave the reckoning,	And by his covenant yaf the rekenynge,
Was wholly in this Reeve's control,	Was hoolly in this Reves governynge,
His swine, his horses, his livestock, and his poultry	His swyn, his hors, his stoor, and his pultrye
His lord's sheep, his cattle, his herd of dairy cows,	His lordes sheep, his neet, his dayerye,
(What would be) the yield of his seed and of his grain.	The yeldynge of his seed and of his greyn.
He well knew by the drought and by the rain	Wel wiste he by the droghte and by the reyn
There was no auditor who could earn anything (by catching him).	Ther was noon auditour koude on him wynne.
Like a stick; there was no calf to be seen.	Ylyk a staf; ther was no calf ysene.
His legs were very long and very lean,	Ful longe were his legges and ful lene,
The top of his head in front was cut short like a priest's.	His top was dokked lyk a preest biforn.
His hair was closely cropped by his ears;	His heer was by his erys ful round yshorn;
His beard was shaved as close as ever he can;	His berd was shave as ny as ever he kan;
The REEVE was a slender choleric man.	The REVE was a sclendre colerik man.
And yet this Manciple fooled them all.	And yet this Manciple sette hir aller cappe.
In any emergency that might occur or happen.	In any caas that myghte falle or happe.
And (they would be) able to help all a shire	And able for to helpen al a shire
In honor and debtless (unless he were crazy),	In honour dettelees (but if he were wood),
To make him live by his own wealth	To make hym lyve by his propre good
Of any lord that is in England,	Of any lord that is in Engelond,
Worthy to be stewards of rent and land	Worthy to been stywardes of rente and lond
Of whom there were a dozen in that house	Of which ther were a duszeyne in that hous
Who were expert and skillful in law,	That weren of lawe expert and curious,
He had more than three times ten masters,	Of maistres hadde he mo than thries ten,
The wisdom of a heap of learned men?	The wisdom of an heep of lerned men?
That such an unlearned man's wit shall surpass	That swich a lewed mannes wit shal pace
That he was always ahead and in good state.	That he was ay biforn and in good staat.
Always he watched so (carefully for his opportunity) in his purchases	Algate he wayted so in his achaat
For whether he paid (cash) or took (goods) on credit,	For wheither that he payde or took by taille,
For how to be wise in buying of victuals;	For to be wise in byynge of vitaille;
Of whom buyers of provisions might take example	Of which achatours myghte take exemple
There was a fine MANCIPLE of a temple (law school),	A gentil MAUNCIPLE was ther of a temple,
And with that he brought us out of town.	And therwithal he broghte us out of towne.
He well knew how to blow and play a bag-pipe,	A baggepipe wel koude he blowe and sowne,
He wore a white coat and a blue hood.	A whit cote and a blew hood wered he.
He well knew how to steal corn and take payment three times;	Wel koude he stelen corn and tollen thries;
And that was mostly of sin and deeds of harlotry.	And that was moost of synne and harlotries.
He was a loudmouth and a buffoon,	He was a janglere and a goliardeys,
His mouth was as large as a large furnace.	His mouth as greet was as a greet forneys.
He wore a sword and a buckler by his side.	A swerd and a bokeler bar he by his syde.
His nostrils were black and wide.	His nosethirles blake were and wyde.
Red as the bristles of a sow's ears;	Reed as the brustles of a sowes erys;
A wart, and thereon stood a tuft of hairs,	A werte, and theron stood a toft of herys,
Upon the exact top of his nose he had	Upon the cop right of his nose he hade
His beard was red as any sow or fox,	His berd as any sowe or fox was reed,
Or break it by running at it with his head.	Or breke it at a rennyng with his heed.
There was no door that he would not heave off its hinges,	Ther was no dore that he nolde heve of harre,
He was stoutly built, broad, a large-framed fellow;	He was short-sholdred, brood, a thikke knarre;
At wrestling he would always take the the prize.	At wrastlynge he wolde have alwey the ram.
That was well proven, for wherever he came,	That proved wel, for over al ther he cam,
He was very strong of muscle, and also of bones.	Ful byg he was of brawn, and eek of bones.
The MILLER was a stout fellow indeed;	The MILLERE was a stout carl for the nones;
A MANCIPLE, and myself -- there were no more.	A MAUNCIPLE, and myself -- ther were namo.
There was also a REEVE, and a MILLER,	Ther was also a REVE, and a MILLERE,
He rode in a tabard (sleeveless jacket) upon a mare.	In a tabard he rood upon a mere.
Both of his own labor and of his possessions.	Bothe of his propre swynk and his catel.
He paid his tithes completely and well,	His tithes payde he ful faire and wel,
Without payment, if it lay in his power.	Withouten hire, if it lay in his myght.
For Christ's sake, for every poor person,	For Cristes sake, for every povre wight,
He would thresh, and moreover make ditches and dig,	He wolde thresshe, and therto dyke and delve,
And then (he loved) his neighbor exactly as himself.	And thanne his neighebor right as hymselve.
At all times, whether it pleased or pained him,	At alle tymes, thogh him gamed or smerte,
Living in peace and perfect love.	Lyvynge in pees and parfit charitee.
He was a true and good worker,	A trewe swynkere and a good was he,
Who had hauled very many a cartload of dung;	That hadde ylad of dong ful many a fother;
With him there was a PLOWMAN, who was his brother,	With hym ther was a PLOWMAN, was his brother,
He taught; but first he followed it himself.	He taughte; but first he folwed it hymselve.
But Christ's teaching and His twelve apostles	But Cristes loore and his apostles twelve
Nor made himself an overly fastidious conscience,	Ne maked him a spiced conscience,
He expected no pomp and ceremony,	He waited after no pompe and reverence,
I believe that nowhere is there a better priest.	A bettre preest I trowe that nowher noon ys.
Whoever he was, of high or low rank,	What so he were, of heigh or lough estat,
Unless it were an obstinate person,	But it were any persone obstinat,
By good example, this was his business.	By good ensample, this was his bisynesse.
To draw folk to heaven by gentleness,	To drawen folk to hevene by fairnesse,
But in his teaching courteous and kind.	But in his techyng discreet and benygne.
Nor domineering nor haughty in his speech,	Ne of his speche daungerous ne digne,
He was not scornful to sinful men,	He was to synful men nat despitous,
And though he was holy and virtuous,	And though he hooly were and vertuous,
He was a shepherd and not a hireling.	He was a shepherde and noght a mercenarie.
But dwelt at home, and kept well his sheep fold (parish),	But dwelte at hoom, and kepte wel his folde,
Or to be hired (as a chaplain) by a guild;	Or with a bretherhed to been withholde;
To seek an appointment as a chantry priest (praying for a patron)	To seken hym a chaunterie for soules,
And run to London unto Saint Paul's	And ran to Londoun unto Seinte Poules
And leave his sheep encumbered in the mire	And leet his sheep encombred in the myre
He did not rent out his benefice (ecclesiastical living)	He sette nat his benefice to hyre
By his purity, how his sheep should live.	By his clennesse, how that his sheep sholde lyve.
Well ought a priest to give an example,	Wel oghte a preest ensample for to yive,
A shit-stained shepherd and a clean sheep.	A shiten shepherde and a clene sheep.
It is no wonder for a layman to go bad;	No wonder is a lewed man to ruste;
For if a priest, on whom we trust, should be foul	For if a preest be foul, on whom we truste,
That if gold rust, what must iron do?	That if gold ruste, what shal iren do?
And this metaphor he added also to that,	And this figure he added eek therto,
He took those words out of the gospel,	Out of the gospel he tho wordes caughte,
That first he wrought, and afterward he taught.	That first he wroghte, and afterward he taughte.
He gave this noble example to his sheep,	This noble ensample to his sheep he yaf,
Going by foot, and in his hand a staff.	Upon his feet, and in his hand a staf.
Those living farthest away in his parish, high-ranking and low,	The ferreste in his parisshe, muche and lite,
But he did not omit, for rain nor thunder,	But he ne lefte nat, for reyn ne thonder,
His parish was wide, and houses far apart,	Wyd was his parisshe, and houses fer asonder,
He knew how to have sufficiency in few possessions.	He koude in litel thyng have suffisaunce.
Some of his offering (received at mass) and also some of his income.	Of his offryng and eek of his substaunce.
Unto his poor parishioners about	Unto his povre parisshens aboute
But rather would he give, there is no doubt,	But rather wolde he yeven, out of doute,
He was very reluctant to excommunicate for (nonpayment of) his tithes,	Ful looth were hym to cursen for his tithes,
And such he was proven many times.	And swich he was ypreved ofte sithes.
And very patient in adversity,	And in adversitee ful pacient,
He would devoutly teach his parishioners.	His parisshens devoutly wolde he teche.
Who would preach Christ's gospel truly;	That Cristes gospel trewely wolde preche;
He was also a learned man, a scholar,	He was also a lerned man, a clerk,
But he was rich in holy thought and work.	But riche he was of hooly thoght and werk.
And (he) was a poor PARSON OF A TOWN,	And was a povre PERSOUN OF A TOUN,
A good man was there of religion,	A good man was ther of religioun,
For she knew the old dance (tricks of the trade) of that art.	For she koude of that art the olde daunce.
She knew, as it happened, about remedies for love	Of remedies of love she knew per chaunce,
In fellowship she well knew how to laugh and chatter.	In felaweshipe wel koude she laughe and carpe.
An overskirt about her large hips,	A foot-mantel aboute hir hipes large,
As broad as a buckler or a shield;	As brood as is a bokeler or a targe;
Wearing a large wimple, and on her head a hat	Ywympled wel, and on hir heed an hat
She sat easily upon a pacing horse,	Upon an amblere esily she sat,
She had teeth widely set apart, truly to say.	Gat-tothed was she, soothly for to seye.
She knew much about wandering by the way.	She koude muchel of wandrynge by the weye.
In Galicia at Saint-James (of Compostella), and at Cologne.	In Galice at Seint-Jame, and at Coloigne.
She had been at Rome, and at Boulogne,	At Rome she hadde been, and at Boloigne,
She had passed many a foreign sea;	She hadde passed many a straunge strem;
But there is no need to speak of that right now.	But thereof nedeth nat to speke as nowthe.
Not counting other company in youth --	Withouten oother compaignye in youthe --
She had (married) five husbands at the church door,	Housbondes at chirche dore she hadde fyve,
She was a worthy woman all her life:	She was a worthy womman al hir lyve:
Bold was her face, and fair, and red of hue.	Boold was hir face, and fair, and reed of hewe.
Very closely laced, and shoes very supple and new.	Ful streite yteyd, and shoes ful moyste and newe.
Her stockings were of fine scarlet red,	Hir hosen weren of fyn scarlet reed,
That on a Sunday were upon her head.	That on a Sonday weren upon hir heed.
I dare swear they weighed ten pound	I dorste swere they weyeden ten pound
That she was out of all charity (love for her neighbor).	That she was out of alle charitee.
And if there did, certainly she was so angry	And if ther dide, certeyn so wrooth was she
Who should go to the Offering before her;	That to the offrynge bifore hire sholde goon;
In all the parish there was no wife	In al the parisshe wif ne was ther noon
She surpassed them of Ypres and of Ghent.	She passed hem of Ypres and of Gaunt.
She had such a skill in cloth-making	Of clooth-makyng she hadde swich an haunt
But she was somewhat deaf, and that was a pity.	But she was somdel deef, and that was scathe.
There was a good WIFE OF beside BATH,	A good WIF was ther OF biside BATHE,
Therefore he loved gold in particular.	Therefore he lovede gold in special.
He kept what he earned in (times of) plague.	He kepte that he wan in pestilence.
And yet he was moderate in spending;	And yet he was but esy of dispence;
Lined with taffeta and with silk.	Lyned with taffata and with sendal.
He was clad all in red and in blue,	In sangwyn and in pers he clad was al,
His study was but little on the Bible.	His studie was but litel on the Bible.
But greatly nourishing and digestible.	But of greet norissyng and digestible.
For it was of no excess,	For it was of no superfluitee,
He was moderate in his diet,	Of his diete mesurable was he,
Bernard, and Gaddesden, and Gilbertus.	Bernard, and Gatesden, and Gilbertyn.
Serapion, Rhazes, and Avicenna,	Serapion, Razis, and Avycen,
Old Hippocrates, Haly, and Galen,	Olde Ypocras, Haly, and Galyen,
And Dioscorides, and also Rufus,	And Deyscorides, and eek Rufus,
He well knew the old Aesculapius,	Wel knew he the olde Esculapius,
Their friendship was not recently begun.	Hir frendshipe nas nat newe to bigynne.
For each of them made the other to profit --	For ech of hem made oother for to wynne --
To send him drugs and his electuaries,	To sende hym drogges and his letuaries,
He had his apothecaries all ready	Ful redy hadde he his apothecaries
Straightway he gave the sick man his remedy.	Anon he yaf the sike man his boote.
He was a truly, perfect practitioner:	He was a verray, parfit praktisour:
And where they were engendered, and by what bodily fluid.	And where they engendred, and of what humour.
Were it of hot, or cold, or moist, or dry elements,	Were it of hoot, or coold, or moyste, or drye,
He knew the cause of every malady,	He knew the cause of everich maladye,
Of his astronomical talismans for his patient.	Of his ymages for his pacient.
He well knew how to calculate the planetary position	Wel koude he fortunen the ascendent
In (astronomically suitable) hours by (use of) his natural science.	In houres by his magyk natureel.
He took care of his patient very many times	He kepte his pacient a ful greet deel
For he was instructed in astronomy.	For he was grounded in astronomye.
In all this world there was no one like him,	In al this world ne was ther noon hym lik,
With us there was a DOCTOR OF MEDICINE	With us ther was a DOCTOUR OF PHISIK;
His ship was called the Maudelayne.	His barge ycleped was the Maudelayne.
And every inlet in Brittany and in Spain.	And every cryke in Britaigne and in Spayne.
From Gotland to the Cape of Finisterre,	Fro Gootlond to the cape of Fynystere,
He knew all the harbors, how they were,	He knew alle the havenes, as they were,
His beard had been shaken by many a tempest.	With many a tempest hadde his berd been shake.
He was bold and prudent in his undertakings;	Hardy he was and wys to undertake;
There was none other such from Hull to Cartagena (Spain).	Ther nas noon swich from Hulle to Cartage.
His currents, and his perils near at hand,	His stremes, and his daungers hym bisides,
But of his skill to reckon well his tides,	But of his craft to rekene wel his tydes,
He sent them home by water to every land (they walked the plank).	By water he sente hem hoom to every lond.
If he fought and had the upper hand,	If that he faught and hadde the hyer hond,
He had no concern for a scrupulous conscience.	Of nyce conscience took he no keep.
While coming from Bordeaux, while the merchant slept.	Fro Burdeux-ward, whil that the chapman sleep.
He had drawn very many a draft of wine	Ful many a draughte of wyn had he ydrawe
And certainly he was a boon companion.	And certeinly he was a good felawe.
The hot summer had made his hue all brown;	The hoote somer hadde maad his hewe al broun;
He had a dagger hanging on a cord	A daggere hangynge on a laas hadde he
In a gown of woolen cloth (that reached) to the knee.	In a gowne of faldyng to the knee.
He rode upon a cart horse, insofar as he knew how,	He rood upon a rouncy, as he kouthe,
For all I know, he was from Dartmouth.	For aught I woot, he was of Dertemouthe.
A SHIPMAN was there, dwelling far in the west;	A SHIPMAN was ther, wonynge fer by weste;
As for white pudding, he made that of the best quality.	For blankmanger, that made he with the beste.
That he had an open sore on his shin.	That on his shyne a mormal hadde he.
But it was a great harm, as it seemed to me,	But greet harm was it, as it thoughte me,
Make stews, and well bake a pie.	Maken mortreux, and wel bake a pye.
He well knew how to judge a draft of London ale.	Wel koude he knowe a draughte of Londoun ale.
And tart poudre-marchant and galingale (spices).	And poudre-marchant tart and galyngale.
To boil the chickens with the marrow bones,	To boille the chiknes with the marybones,
A COOK they had with them for the occasion	A COOK they hadde with hem for the nones
And have a gown with a train royally carried.	And have a mantel roialliche ybore.
And go to feasts on holiday eves heading the procession,	And goon to vigilies al bifore,
It is very fine to be called "my lady,"	It is ful fair to been ycleped "madame,"
And otherwise certainly they would be to blame.	And elles certeyn were they to blame.
And also their wives would well assent to it;	And eek hir wyves wolde it wel assente;
Was suitable to be an alderman.	Was shaply for to been an alderman.
Every one of them, for the wisdom that he knows,	Everich, for the wisdom that he kan,
To sit on a dais in a city hall.	To sitten in a yeldehalle on a deys.
Each of them well seemed a solid citizen	Wel semed ech of hem a fair burgeys
Their belts and their purses every bit.	Hire girdles and hir pouches everydeel.
But entirely with silver, wrought very neatly and well,	But al with silver, wroght ful clene and weel,
Their knives were not mounted with brass	Hir knyves were chaped noght with bras
Their equipment was adorned all freshly and new;	Ful fressh and newe hir geere apiked was;
Of a solemn and a great parish guild.	Of a solempne and a greet fraternitee.
A WEAVER, a DYER, and a TAPESTRY-MAKER --	A WEBBE, a DYERE, and a TAPYCER --
A HABERDASHER and a CARPENTER,	AN HABERDASSHERE and a CARPENTER,
There was nowhere such a worthy landowner.	Was nowher swich a worthy vavasour.
He had been a sheriff, and an auditor of taxes.	A shirreve hadde he been, and a contour.
Hung at his belt, white as morning milk.	Heeng at his girdel, whit as morne milk.
A dagger and a purse all of silk	An anlaas and a gipser al of silk
He was a member of parliament many times.	Ful ofte tyme he was knyght of the shire.
He presided as lord and sire at court sessions;	At sessiouns ther was he lord and sire;
Stood covered (with table cloth) and ready all the long day.	Stood redy covered al the longe day.
Hotly spiced and sharp, and ready all his cooking equipment.	Poynaunt and sharp, and redy al his geere.
Woe was his cook unless his sauce was	Wo was his cook but if his sauce were
And many a bream and many a pike in his fish pond.	And many a breem and many a luce in stuwe.
He had very many fat partridges in pens,	Ful many a fat partrich hadde he in muwe,
So he varied his midday meal and his supper.	So chaunged he his mete and his soper.
In accord with the various seasons of the year,	After the sondry sesons of the yeer,
Of all the dainties that men could imagine,	Of alle deyntees that men koude thynke,
That in his house it snowed with food and drink;	It snewed in his hous of mete and drynke;
Of fish and meat, and that so plentiful	Of fissh and flessh, and that so plentevous
Nowhere was there any man better stocked with wine.	A bettre envyned man was nowher noon.
His bread, his ale, was always of the same (good) quality;	His breed, his ale, was alweys after oon;
He was Saint Julian (patron of hospitality) in his country.	Seint Julian he was in his contree.
He was a householder, and a great one at that;	An housholdere, and that a greet, was he;
Was truly perfect happiness.	Was verray felicitee parfit.
Who held the opinion that pure pleasure	That heeld opinioun that pleyn delit
For he was Epicurus' own son,	For he was Epicurus owene sone,
His custom was always to live in delight,	To lyven in delit was evere his wone,
He well loved a bit of bread dipped in wine in the morning;	Wel loved he by the morwe a sop in wyn;
His beard was white as a daisy;	Whit was his berd as is the dayesye;
A FRANKLIN was in his company.	A FRANKELEYN was in his compaignye.
I tell no longer tale of his clothing.	Of his array telle I no lenger tale.
Girded with a belt of silk, with small stripes;	Girt with a ceint of silk, with barres smale;
He rode but simply in a parti-colored coat,	He rood but hoomly in a medlee cote,
And he knew every statute completely by heart.	And every statut koude he pleyn by rote.
So that no one could find a flaw in his writing;	Ther koude no wight pynche at his writyng;
Furthermore, he knew how to compose and draw up a legal document,	Therto he koude endite and make a thyng,
That from the time of king William have occurred.	That from the tyme of kyng William were falle.
And yet he seemed busier than he was.	And yet he semed bisier than he was.
There was nowhere so busy a man as he,	Nowher so bisy a man as he ther nas,
His purchasing could not be invalidated.	His purchasyng myghte nat been infect.
In fact, all was unrestricted possession to him;	Al was fee symple to hym in effect;
There was nowhere so great a land-buyer:	So greet a purchasour was nowher noon:
He had many grants of yearly income.	Of fees and robes hadde he many oon.
For his knowledge and for his excellent reputation,	For his science and for his heigh renoun,
By royal appointment and with full jurisdiction.	By patente and by pleyn commissioun.
He was very often a judge in the court of assizes,	Justice he was ful often in assise,
He was judicious and of great dignity --	Discreet he was and of greet reverence --
Was also there, very rich in superior qualities.	Ther was also, ful riche of excellence.
Who often had been at the Porch of St. Paul's (where lawyers gather)	That often hadde been at the Parvys,
A SERGEANT OF THE LAW (high-ranking attorney), prudent and wise,	A SERGEANT OF THE LAWE, war and wys,
And gladly would he learn and gladly teach.	And gladly wolde he lerne and gladly teche.
His speech was consonant with moral virtue,	Sownynge in moral vertu was his speche,
And short and lively and full of elevated content;	And short and quyk and ful of hy sentence;
And that was said with due formality and respect,	And that was seyd in forme and reverence,
He spoke not one word more than was needed,	Noght o word spak he moore than was neede,
Of those who gave him the wherewithal to attend the schools.	Of hem that yaf hym wherwith to scoleye.
And diligently did pray for the souls	And bisily gan for the soules preye
He spent on books and on learning,	On bookes and on lernynge he it spente,
But all that he could get from his friends,	But al that he myghte of his freendes hente,
Nevertheless he had but little gold in his strongbox;	Yet hadde he but litel gold in cofre;
But even though he was a philosopher,	But al be that he was a philosophre,
Than rich robes, or a fiddle, or an elegant psaltery.	Than robes riche, or fithele, or gay sautrie.
Of Aristotle and his philosophy	Of Aristotle and his philosophie
Twenty books, bound in black or red,	Twenty bookes, clad in blak or reed,
Nor was he worldly enough to take secular employment.	Ne was so worldly for to have office.
For he had not yet obtained an ecclesiastical living,	For he hadde geten hym yet no benefice,
His short overcoat was very threadbare,	Ful thredbare was his overeste courtepy,
But looked emaciated, and moreover abstemious.	But looked holwe, and therto sobrely.
And he was not very fat, I affirm,	And he nas nat right fat, I undertake,
His horse was as lean as is a rake,	As leene was his hors as is a rake,
Who long before had begun the study of logic.	That unto logyk hadde longe ygo.
There was also a CLERK (scholar) from Oxford,	A CLERK ther was of Oxenford also,
But, to say the truth, I do not know what men call him.	But, sooth to seyn, I noot how men hym calle.
With his buying and selling and with his financial deals.	With his bargaynes and with his chevyssaunce.
He was so dignified in managing his affairs	So estatly was he of his governaunce
There was no one who knew that he was in debt,	Ther wiste no wight that he was in dette,
This worthy man employed his wit very well:	This worthy man ful wel his wit bisette:
He well knew how to deal in foreign currencies.	Wel koude he in eschaunge sheeldes selle.
Between Middelburgh (Holland) and Orwell (England).	Bitwixe Middelburgh and Orewelle.
He wanted the sea to be guarded at all costs	He wolde the see were kept for any thyng
Concerning always the increase of his profits.	Sownynge alwey th' encrees of his wynnyng.
His opinions he spoke very solemnly,	His resons he spak ful solempnely,
Upon his head (he wore a) Flemish beaver hat,	Upon his heed a Flaundryssh bever hat,
Wearing parti-colored cloth, and proudly he sat on his horse;	In mottelee, and hye on horse he sat;
There was a MERCHANT with a forked beard,	A MARCHANT was ther with a forked berd,
This worthy friar was called Huberd.	This worthy lymytour was cleped Huberd.
As do the stars in the frosty night.	As doon the sterres in the frosty nyght.
His eyes twinkled in his head exactly	His eyen twynkled in his heed aryght
And in his harping, when he had sung,	And in his harpyng, whan that he hadde songe,
To make his English sweet upon his tongue;	To make his Englissh sweete upon his tonge;
Somewhat he lisped, for his affectation,	Somwhat he lipsed, for his wantownesse,
Of wide (expensive) cloth was his short cloak,	Of double worstede was his semycope,
But he was like a master of arts or a pope.	But he was lyk a maister or a pope.
With a threadbare cope, like a poor scholar,	With a thredbare cope, as is a povre scoler,
For there he was not like a cloistered monk	For ther he was nat lyk a cloysterer
He knew how to be much help on days for resolving disputes,	In love-dayes ther koude he muchel help,
And he knew how to frolic, as if he were indeed a pup.	And rage he koude, as it were right a whelp.
His total profit was much more than his proper income.	His purchas was wel bettre than his rente.
Yet he would have a farthing, before he went away.	Yet wolde he have a ferthyng, er he wente.
So pleasant was his "In the beginning,"	So plesaunt was his "In principio,"
None of his brethren came there in his territory;	Noon of his bretheren cam ther in his haunt;
And he gave a certain fee for his grant (of begging rights);	And yaf a certeyn ferme for the graunt;
He was the best beggar in his house;	He was the beste beggere in his hous;
There was no man anywhere so capable (of such work).	Ther nas no man nowher so vertuous.
He was courteous and graciously humble;	Curteis he was and lowely of servyse;
And every where, where profit should arise,	And over al, ther as profit sholde arise,
But all with rich people and sellers of victuals.	But al with riche and selleres of vitaille.
To deal with any such poor people,	For to deelen with no swich poraille,
It is not respectable; it can not be profitable,	It is nat honest; it may nat avaunce,
It was not suitable, in view of his official position,	Acorded nat, as by his facultee,
For unto such a worthy man as he	For unto swich a worthy man as he
Better than a leper or a beggar-woman,	Bet than a lazar or a beggestere,
And every innkeeper and barmaid	And everich hostiler and tappestere
He knew the taverns well in every town	He knew the tavernes wel in every toun
Furthermore he was strong as a champion fighter.	Therto he strong was as a champioun.
His neck was white as a lily flower;	His nekke whit was as the flour-de-lys;
He absolutely took the prize for reciting ballads.	Of yeddynges he baar outrely the pris.
He well knew how to sing and play on a rote (string instrument);	Wel koude he synge and pleyen on a rote;
And pins, to give to fair wives.	And pynnes, for to yeven faire wyves.
His hood was always stuffed full of knives	His typet was ay farsed ful of knyves
One may give silver to the poor friars.	Men moote yeve silver to the povre freres.
Therefore instead of weeping and prayers	Therfore in stede of wepynge and preyeres
He can not weep, although he painfully suffers.	He may nat wepe, althogh hym soore smerte.
For many a man is so hard in his heart,	For many a man so hard is of his herte,
He knew that a man was repentant;	He wiste that a man was repentaunt;
For if he gave, he (the friar) dared to assert,	For if he yaf, he dorste make avaunt,
Is a sign that a man is well confessed;	Is signe that a man is wel yshryve;
Where he knew he would have a good gift.	Ther as he wiste to have a good pitaunce.
He was a lenient man in giving penance,	He was an esy man to yeve penaunce,
And his absolution was pleasant:	And plesaunt was his absolucioun:
He heard confession very sweetly,	Ful swetely herde he confessioun,
For he was licensed by his order.	For of his ordre he was licenciat.
As he said himself, more than a parish priest,	As seyde hymself, moore than a curat,
For he had power of confession,	For he hadde power of confessioun,
And also with worthy women of the town;	And eek with worthy wommen of the toun;
With landowners every where in his country,	With frankeleyns over al in his contree,
He was a noble supporter of his order.	Unto his ordre he was a noble post.
Of young women at his own cost.	Of yonge wommen at his owene cost.
He had made very many a marriage	He hadde maad ful many a mariage
So much of sociability and elegant speech.	So muchel of daliaunce and fair langage.
In all the four orders of friars is no one that knows	In alle the ordres foure is noon that kan
A limiter (with an assigned territory), a very solemn man.	A lymytour, a ful solempne man.
There was a FRIAR, a pleasure-loving and merry one,	A FRERE ther was, a wantowne and a merye,
His saddle horse was as brown as is a berry.	His palfrey was as broun as is a berye.
A fat swan loved he best of any roast.	A fat swan loved he best of any roost.
Now certainly he was a handsome ecclesiastical dignitary;	Now certeinly he was a fair prelaat;
His boots supple, his horse in excellent condition.	His bootes souple, his hors in greet estaat.
Which gleamed like a furnace under a cauldron;	That stemed as a forneys of a leed;
His eyes were prominent, and rolling in his head,	His eyen stepe, and rollynge in his heed,
He was a very plump lord and in good condition;	He was a lord ful fat and in good poynt;
And his face did too, as if he had been rubbed with oil.	And eek his face, as he hadde been enoynt.
His head was bald, which shone like any glass,	His heed was balled, that shoon as any glas,
There was an elaborate knot in the larger end.	A love-knotte in the gretter ende ther was.
He had a very skillfully made pin of gold;	He hadde of gold ywroght a ful curious pyn;
With squirrel fur, and that the finest in the land;	With grys, and that the fyneste of a lond;
I saw his sleeves lined at the hand	I seigh his sleves purfiled at the hond
Was all his pleasure, by no means would he refrain from it.	Was al his lust, for no cost wolde he spare.
Of tracking and of hunting for the hare	Of prikyng and of huntyng for the hare
He had greyhounds as swift as fowl in flight;	Grehoundes he hadde as swift as fowel in flight;
Therefore he was indeed a vigorous horseman:	Therfore he was a prikasour aright:
Let Augustine have his work reserved to him!	Lat Austyn have his swynk to hym reserved!
As Augustine commands? How shall the world be served?	As Austyn bit? How shal the world be served?
Or work with his hands, and labor,	Or swynken with his handes, and laboure,
Why should he study and make himself crazy,	What sholde he studie and make hymselven wood,
And I said his opinion was good.	And I seyde his opinion was good.
But he considered that same text not worth an oyster;	But thilke text heeld he nat worth an oystre;
This is to say, a monk out of his cloister.	This is to seyn, a monk out of his cloystre.
Is like a fish that is out of water --	Is likned til a fissh that is waterlees --
Nor that a monk, when he is heedless of rules,	Ne that a monk, whan he is recchelees,
That says that hunters are not holy men,	That seith that hunters ben nat hooly men,
He gave not a plucked hen for that text	He yaf nat of that text a pulled hen,
And followed the broader customs of modern times.	And heeld after the newe world the space.
Because it was old and somewhat strict	By cause that it was old and somdel streit
The rule of Saint Maurus or of Saint Benedict --	The reule of Seint Maure or of Seint Beneit --
Where this lord was prior of the subordinate monastery.	Ther as this lord was kepere of the celle.
And also as loud as does the chapel belle	And eek as loude as dooth the chapel belle
Jingle in a whistling wind as clear	Gynglen in a whistlynge wynd als cleere
And when he rode, one could hear his bridle	And whan he rood, men myghte his brydel heere
He had very many fine horses in his stable,	Ful many a deyntee hors hadde he in stable,
A virile man, qualified to be an abbot.	A manly man, to been an abbot able.
An outrider (a monk with business outside the monastery), who loved hunting,	An outridere, that lovede venerie,
Who was her secretary, and three priests.	That was hir chapeleyne, and preestes thre.
She had another NUN with her,	Another NONNE with hire hadde she,
And after "Love conquers all."	And after Amor vincit omnia.
On which there was first written an A with a crown,	On which ther was first write a crowned A,
And thereon hung a brooch of very bright gold,	And theron heng a brooch of gold ful sheene,
A set of beads, adorned with large green beads,	A peire of bedes, gauded al with grene,
About her arm she bore of small coral	Of smal coral aboute hire arm she bar
Her cloak was very well made , as I was aware.	Ful fetys was hir cloke, as I was war.
For, certainly, she was not undergrown.	For, hardily, she was nat undergrowe.
But surely she had a fair forehead;	But sikerly she hadde a fair forheed;
Her mouth very small, and moreover soft and red.	Hir mouth ful smal, and therto softe and reed.
Her nose well formed, her eyes gray as glass,	Hir nose tretys, hir eyen greye as glas,
Her wimple was pleated in a very seemly manner,	Ful semyly hir wympul pynched was,
And all was feeling and tender heart.	And al was conscience and tendre herte.
Or if someone smote it smartly with a stick;	Or if men smoot it with a yerde smerte;
But sorely she wept if one of them were dead,	But soore wepte she if oon of hem were deed,
With roasted meat, or milk and fine white bread.	With rosted flessh, or milk and wastel-breed.
She had some small hounds that she fed	Of smale houndes hadde she that she fedde
She would weep, if she saw a mouse	She wolde wepe, if that she saugh a mous
She was so charitable and so compassionate	She was so charitable and so pitous
But to speak of her moral sense,	But for to speken of hire conscience,
And to be considered worthy of reverence.	And to ben holden digne of reverence.
Of court, and to be dignified in behavior,	Of court, and to been estatlich of manere,
And she took pains to imitate the manners	And peyned hire to countrefete cheere
And very pleasant, and amiable in demeanor,	And ful plesaunt, and amyable of port,
And surely she was of excellent deportment,	And sikerly she was of greet desport,
She reached for her food in a very seemly manner.	Ful semely after hir mete she raughte.
That in her cup there was seen no tiny bit	That in hir coppe ther was no ferthyng sene
She wiped her upper lip so clean	Hir over-lippe wyped she so clene
Her greatest pleasure was in good manners.	In curteisie was set ful muchel hir lest.
That no drop fell upon her breast.	That no drope ne fille upon hire brest.
She well knew how to carry a morsel (to her mouth) and take good care	Wel koude she carie a morsel and wel kepe
Nor wet her fingers deep in her sauce;	Ne wette hir fyngres in hir sauce depe;
She let no morsel fall from her lips,	She leet no morsel from hir lippes falle,
At meals she was well taught indeed;	At mete wel ytaught was she with alle;
For French of Paris was to her unknown.	For Frenssh of Parys was to hire unknowe.
And she spoke French very well and elegantly,	And Frenssh she spak ful faire and fetisly,
Intoned in her nose in a very polite manner;	Entuned in hir nose ful semely;
She sang the divine service very well,	Ful weel she soong the service dyvyne,
And she was called Madam Eglantine.	And she was cleped madame Eglentyne.
Her greatest oath was but by Saint Loy;	Hire gretteste ooth was but by Seinte Loy;
Who was very simple and modest in her smiling;	That of hir smylyng was ful symple and coy;
There was also a Nun, a PRIORESS,	Ther was also a Nonne, a PRIORESSE,
He was a forester, truly, as I guess.	A forster was he, soothly, as I gesse.
He carried a horn, the shoulder strap was green;	An horn he bar, the bawdryk was of grene;
Well ornamented and sharp as the point of a spear;	Harneised wel and sharp as point of spere;
And on that other side an elegant dagger	And on that oother syde a gay daggere
And by his side a sword and a small shield,	And by his syde a swerd and a bokeler,
He wore an elegant archer's wrist-guard upon his arm,	Upon his arm he baar a gay bracer,
He well knew all the practice of woodcraft.	Of wodecraft wel koude he al the usage.
He had a close-cropped head, with a brown face.	A not heed hadde he, with a broun visage.
And in his hand he carried a mighty bow.	And in his hand he baar a myghty bowe.
His arrows did not fall short because of drooping feathers),	His arwes drouped noght with fetheres lowe),
(He well knew how to care for his equipment as a yeoman should;	(Wel koude he dresse his takel yemanly;
A sheaf of peacock arrows, bright and keen,	A sheef of pecok arwes, bright and kene,
And he (the yeoman) was clad in coat and hood of green.	And he was clad in cote and hood of grene.
At that time, for it pleased him so to travel,	At that tyme, for hym liste ride so,
He (the Knight) had A YEOMAN and no more servants	A YEMAN hadde he and servantz namo
And carved before his father at the table.	And carf biforn his fader at the table.
Courteous he was, humble, and willing to serve,	Curteis he was, lowely, and servysable,
He slept no more than does a nightingale.	He sleep namoore than dooth a nyghtyngale.
He loved so passionately that at nighttime	So hoote he lovede that by nyghtertale
Joust and also dance, and well draw and write.	Juste and eek daunce, and weel purtreye and write.
He well knew how to sit on horse and handsomely ride.	Wel koude he sitte on hors and faire ryde.
His gown was short, with long and wide sleeves.	Short was his gowne, with sleves longe and wyde.
He was as fresh as is the month of May.	He was as fressh as is the month of May.
Singing he was, or fluting, all the day;	Syngynge he was, or floytynge, al the day;
All full of fresh flowers, white and red.	Al ful of fresshe floures, whyte and reede.
He was embroidered, as if it were a mead	Embrouded was he, as it were a meede
In hope to stand in his lady's good graces.	In hope to stonden in his lady grace.
And conducted himself well, for so little a space of time,	And born hym weel, as of so litel space,
In Flanders, in Artois, and Picardy,	In Flaundres, in Artoys, and Pycardie,
And wonderfully agile, and of great strength.	And wonderly delyvere, and of greet strengthe.
Of his stature he was of moderate height,	Of his stature he was of evene lengthe,
He was twenty years of age, I guess.	Of twenty yeer of age he was, I gesse.
With locks curled as if they had been laid in a curler.	With lokkes crulle as they were leyd in presse.
A lover and a lively bachelor,	A lovyere and a lusty bacheler,
With him there was his son, a young SQUIRE,	With hym ther was his sone, a yong SQUIER,
And went to do his pilgrimage.	And wente for to doon his pilgrymage.
For he was recently come (back) from his expedition,	For he was late ycome from his viage,
All stained (with rust) by his coat of mail,	Al bismotered with his habergeon,
His horses were good, but he was not gaily dressed.	His hors were goode, but he was nat gay.
But to tell you of his clothing,	But for to tellen yow of his array,
He was a truly perfect, noble knight.	He was a verray, parfit gentil knyght.
In all his life unto any sort of person.	In al his lyf unto no maner wight.
He never yet said any rude word	He nevere yet no vileynye ne sayde
And of his deportment as meek as is a maid.	And of his port as meeke as is a mayde.
And although he was brave, he was prudent,	And though that he were worthy, he was wys,
And evermore he had an outstanding reputation	And everemoore he hadde a sovereyn prys.
Against another heathen in Turkey;	Agayn another hethen in Turkye;
This same worthy knight had also been	This ilke worthy knyght hadde been also
Three times in formal duels, and each time slain his foe.	In lystes thries, and ay slayn his foo.
And fought for our faith at Tlemcen	And foughten for oure feith at Tramyssene
He had been at fifteen mortal battles,	At mortal batailles hadde he been fiftene,
He had been at many a noble expedition.	At many a noble armee hadde he be.
When they were won, and in the Mediterranean	Whan they were wonne, and in the Grete See
He was at Ayash and at Atalia,	At Lyeys was he and at Satalye,
Of Algeciras, and had ridden in Morocco.	Of Algezir, and riden in Belmarye.
Also he had been in Grenada at the siege	In Gernade at the seege eek hadde he be
He had campaigned in Lithuania and in Russia,	In Lettow hadde he reysed and in Ruce,
Above (knights of) all nations in Prussia;	Aboven alle nacions in Pruce;
He had sat very many times in the place of honor,	Ful ofte tyme he hadde the bord bigonne
He was at Alexandria when it was won.	At Alisaundre he was whan it was wonne.
And (was) ever honored for his worthiness;	And evere honoured for his worthynesse;
As well in Christendom as in heathen lands,	As wel in cristendom as in hethenesse,
And for that he had ridden, no man farther,	And therto hadde he riden, no man ferre,
He was very worthy in his lord's war,	Ful worthy was he in his lordes werre,
Fidelity and good reputation, generosity and courtesy.	Trouthe and honour, fredom and curteisie.
Who from the time that he first began	That fro the tyme that he first bigan
A KNIGHT there was, and that (one was) a worthy man,	A KNYGHT ther was, and that a worthy man,
And at a knight then will I first begin.	And at a knyght than wol I first bigynne.
And also what clothing that they were in;	And eek in what array that they were inne;
And who they were, and of what social rank,	And whiche they weren, and of what degree,
Of each of them, as it seemed to me,	Of ech of hem, so as it semed me,
To tell you all the circumstances	To telle yow al the condicioun
It seems to me in accord with reason	Me thynketh it acordaunt to resoun
Before I proceed further in this tale,	Er that I ferther in this tale pace,
To take our way where I (will) tell you.	To take oure wey ther as I yow devyse.
And made agreement to rise early,	And made forward erly for to ryse,
That I was of their fellowship straightway,	That I was of hir felaweshipe anon,
I had so spoken with everyone of them	So hadde I spoken with hem everichon
And in brief, when the sun was (gone) to rest,	And shortly, whan the sonne was to reste,
And we were well accommodated in the best way.	And wel we weren esed atte beste.
The bedrooms and the stables were spacious,	The chambres and the stables weren wyde,
Who intended to ride toward Canterbury.	That toward Caunterbury wolden ryde.
In fellowship, and they were all pilgrims,	In felaweshipe, and pilgrimes were they alle,
Well nine and twenty in a company	Wel nyne and twenty in a compaignye
At night had come into that hostelry	At nyght was come into that hostelrye
To Canterbury with a very devout spirit,	To Caunterbury with ful devout corage,
Ready to go on my pilgrimage	Redy to wenden on my pilgrymage
In Southwark at the Tabard Inn as I lay	In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay
It happened that in that season on one day,	Bifil that in that seson on a day,
Who helped them when they were sick.	That hem hath holpen whan that they were seeke.
To seek the holy blessed martyr,	The hooly blisful martir for to seke,
Of England to Canterbury they travel,	Of Engelond to Caunterbury they wende,
To distant shrines, known in various lands;	To ferne halwes, kowthe in sondry londes;
And professional pilgrims to seek foreign shores,	And palmeres for to seken straunge strondes,
Then folk long to go on pilgrimages,	Thanne longen folk to goon on pilgrimages,
(So Nature incites them in their hearts),	(So priketh hem Nature in hir corages),
Those that sleep all the night with open eyes	That slepen al the nyght with open ye
And small fowls make melody,	And smale foweles maken melodye,
Has run half its course in Aries,	Hath in the Ram his half cours yronne,
The tender new leaves, and the young sun	The tendre croppes, and the yonge sonne
In every wood and field has breathed life into	Inspired hath in every holt and heeth
By which power the flower is created;	Of which vertu engendred is the flour;
And bathed every vein (of the plants) in such liquid	And bathed every veyne in swich licour
Has pierced the drought of March to the root,	The droghte of March hath perced to the roote,
When April with its sweet-smelling showers	Whan that Aprill with his shoures soote
And God save all this fair company! Amen.	And God save al this faire compaignye! Amen.
Thus ends Palamon and Emelye;	Thus endeth Palamon and Emelye;
Of jealousy or any other vexation.	Of jalousie or any oother teene.
That never was there any word between them	That nevere was ther no word hem bitwene
And he serves her so gently,	And he hire serveth so gentilly,
Living in bliss, in riches, and in health,	Lyvynge in blisse, in richesse, and in heele,
For now is Palamon in complete happiness,	For now is Palamon in alle wele,
Send him his love who has dearly paid for it;	Sende hym his love that hath it deere aboght;
And God, who has made all this wide world,	And God, that al this wyde world hath wroght,
Palamon has wedded Emelye.	Hath Palamon ywedded Emelye.
And thus with all bliss and festivity	And thus with alle blisse and melodye
By all the council and the baronage.	By al the conseil and the baronage.
That is called matrimony or marriage,	That highte matrimoigne or mariage,
Between them was made right away the bond	Bitwixen hem was maad anon the bond
To make you assent to this thing.	To make yow assente to this thyng.
"I suppose little preaching is needed here	"I trowe ther nedeth litel sermonyng
Then said he thus to Palamon the knight:	Thanne seyde he thus to Palamon the knight:
For gentle mercy ought to prevail over justice."	For gentil mercy oghte to passen right."
It must be taken in account, believe me,	It moste been considered, leeveth me,
And has had for you such great adversity,	And had for yow so greet adversitee,
Since he has served you so many a year,	Syn he hath served yow so many a yeer,
And even if he were a poor young knight,	And though he were a povre bacheler,
He is a king's brother's son, indeed;	He is a kynges brother sone, pardee;
Lend me your hand, for this is our decision.	Lene me youre hond, for this is oure accord.
And take him for husband and for lord.	And taken hym for housbonde and for lord.
That you shall of your grace have pity upon him,	That ye shul of youre grace upon hym rewe,
And ever has done so since you first knew him,	And ever hath doon syn ye first hym knewe,
Who serves you with will, heart, and might,	That serveth yow with wille, herte, and myght,
That gentle Palamon, your own knight,	That gentil Palamon, youre owene knyght,
With all the advice of my parliament here,	With al th'avys heere of my parlement,
"Sister," said he, "this is my full intention,	"Suster," quod he, "this is my fulle assent,
There will we first amend and begin.	Ther wol we first amenden and bigynne.
One perfect joy, lasting evermore.	O parfit joye, lastynge everemo.
I advise that we make of two sorrows	I rede that we make of sorwes two
And before we depart from this place	And er that we departen from this place
And thank Jupiter for all his grace?	And thanken Juppiter of al his grace?
But after woe I advise us to be merry	But after wo I rede us to be merye
"What can I conclude of this long argument,	"What may I conclude of this longe serye,
And as yet they may not change their desires.	And yet they mowe hir lustes nat amende.
They offend both his soul and themselves as well,	That both his soule and eek hemself offende,
Can he show them his gratitude? Nay, God knows, not a bit;	Kan he hem thank? Nay, God woot, never a deel,
Why do his cousin and his wife complain here	Why grucchen heere his cosyn and his wyf
Out of this foul prison of this life?	Out of this foule prisoun of this lyf?
Is departed with all due honor	Departed is with duetee and honour
That good Arcite, flower of chivalry,	That goode Arcite, of chivalrie flour,
Why do we complain, why do we have sadness,	Why grucchen we, why have we hevynesse,
"The contrary of all this is willfulness.	"The contrarie of al this is wilfulnesse.
To die when he has the most fame.	To dyen whan that he is best of name.
Then is it best, for a worthy fame,	Thanne is it best, as for a worthy fame,
For all forgotten is his knightly prowess.	For al forgeten is his vassellage.
When his breath is yielded up with honor,	Whan with honour up yolden is his breeth,
And his friend ought to be more pleased with his death,	And gladder oghte his freend been of his deeth,
Then he has not done his friend, nor himself, any shame.	Thanne hath he doon his freend, ne hym, no shame.
When he is sure of his good name;	Whan he is siker of his goode name;
To die in his (time of) excellence and flower,	To dyen in his excellence and flour,
And certainly a man has most honor	And certeinly a man hath moost honour
And is rebel to Him that can rule all.	And rebel is to hym that al may gye.
And whoever complains in any way, he does folly,	And whoso gruccheth ought, he dooth folye,
And namely that which is due to us all.	And namely that to us alle is due.
To make virtue of necessity,	To maken vertu of necessitee,
"Then is it wisdom, as it seems to me,	"Thanne is it wysdom, as it thynketh me,
Of any rank, is helped by striving.	Of no degree, availleth for to stryve.
And against this no living creature,	And heer-agayns no creature on lyve,
From which it is derived, to tell the truth?	From which it is dirryved, sooth to telle?
Causing all to return to its own origin	Convertynge al unto his propre welle
Who is prince and cause of all things,	That is prince and cause of alle thyng,
"What causes this but Jupiter, the king,	"What maketh this but Juppiter, the kyng,
Then may I say that all things must die.	Thanne may I seyn that al this thyng moot deye.
One in the large field, as people can see;	Som in the large feeld, as men may see;
One in his bed, one in the deep sea,	Som in his bed, som in the depe see,
He must be dead, the king as must a servant boy;	He moot be deed, the kyng as shal a page;
This is to say, in youth or else in age --	This is to seyn, in youthe or elles age --
That by necessity, in one of these two periods of time --	That nedes, in oon of thise termes two --
"Of man and woman also we see well	"Of man and womman seen we wel also
Then you can see that all things have an end.	Thanne may ye se that al this thyng hath ende.
We see the great cities grow weak and pass away.	The grete tounes se we wane and wende.
The broad river sometimes grows dry;	The brode ryver somtyme wexeth dreye;
Under our feet, on which we tread and go,	Under oure feet, on which we trede and goon,
"Consider also how the hard stone	"Considereth eek how that the harde stoon
Yet at the last the tree is wasted away.	Yet at the laste wasted is the tree.
And has so long a life, as we may see,	And hath so long a lif, as we may see,
From the time that it first begins to spring,	From tyme that it first bigynneth to sprynge,
"Lo the oak, that is so slow to mature,	"Loo the ook, that hath so long a norisshynge
This thou canst understand and plainly see.	This maystow understonde and seen at ye.
And not eternally, without any lie.	And nat eterne, withouten any lye.
Shall endure (for a set time) one after another,	Shullen enduren by successiouns,
He has so well established his plan	He hath so wel biset his ordinaunce
And therefore, by his wise foresight,	And therfore, of his wise purveiaunce,
Descending (from that) until it becomes corruptible.	Descendynge so til it be corrumpable.
But of a thing that is complete and stable,	But of a thyng that parfit is and stable,
Of no part or portion of a thing,	Of no partie or cantel of a thyng,
For nature has not taken its beginning	For nature hath nat taken his bigynnyng
That every part derives from its whole,	That every part dirryveth from his hool,
Well may one know, unless it be a fool,	Wel may men knowe, but it be a fool,
That that same Mover is stable and eternal.	That thilke Moevere stable is and eterne.
Unless I wish to make my meaning more clear.	But that me list declaren my sentence.
For it is proven by experience,	For it is preeved by experience,
There is no need to cite any written authority,	Ther nedeth noght noon auctoritee t'allegge,
Although they may yet well shorten those days.	Al mowe they yet tho dayes wel abregge.
Beyond the which day they can not pass,	Over the whiche day they may nat pace,
To all that is engendered in this place,	To al that is engendred in this place,
Specific (numbers of) days and (term of) duration	Certeyne dayes and duracioun
"Has established in this wretched world below	"Hath stablissed in this wrecched world adoun
That same Prince and that Mover," said he,	That same Prince and that Moevere," quod he,
The fire, the air, the water, and the land	The fyr, the eyr, the water, and the lond
For with that faire chain of love he bound	For with that faire cheyne of love he bond
Well knew he why, and what thereof he meant,	Wel wiste he why, and what thereof he mente,
Great was the effect, and noble was his plan.	Greet was th'effect, and heigh was his entente.
When he first made the faire chain of love,	Whan he first made the faire cheyne of love,
"The First Mover of the First Cause above,	"The Firste Moevere of the cause above,
And after that exactly thus he pronounced his decision:	And after that right thus he seyde his wille:
And with a sad face he sighed softly,	And with a sad visage he siked stille,
He set his eyes where his object of desire was.	His eyen sette he ther as was his lest.
And Theseus had waited for a while	And Theseus abiden hadde a space
When they were set, and all the place was hushed,	Whan they were set, and hust was al the place,
Then Theseus sent for Emelye.	Tho sente Theseus for Emelye.
He came at his (Theseus's) commandment in haste.	He cam at his comandement in hye.
But in his black clothes sorrowfully	But in his blake clothes sorwefully
Unknown by him (Palamon) what was the cause and why,	Unwist of hym what was the cause and why,
Ordered (someone) to send for gentle Palamon,	Leet senden after gentil Palamon,
For which this noble Theseus immediately	For which this noble Theseus anon
And have fully the submission of the Thebans.	And have fully of Thebans obeisaunce.
Among which topics was discussed (a proposal)	Among the whiche pointz yspoken was,
At Athens, upon certain topics and cases;	At Atthenes, upon certein pointz and caas;
Then it seemed to me there was a parliament	Thanne semed me ther was a parlement
Of the Greeks, by one general assent.	Of Grekes, by oon general assent.
All stopped is the mourning and the tears	Al stynted is the moornynge and the teres
By the course of events and by length of a certain number of years,	By processe and by lengthe of certeyn yeres,
And make an end of my long tale.	And maken of my longe tale an ende.
But shortly to the point then I will go	But shortly to the point thanne wol I wende
Home to Athens, when the games are done;	Hoom til Atthenes, whan the pley is doon;
Nor who bore him best, in any difficulty.	Ne who that baar hym best, in no disjoynt.
Who wrestles best, naked with oil anointed,	Who wrastleth best naked with oille enoynt,
The funeral games I care not to say	The wake-pleyes; ne kepe I nat to seye
All that same night; nor how the Greeks play	Al thilke nyght; ne how the Grekes pleye
Nor how that wake was held	Ne how that lyche-wake was yholde
Nor how Arcite is burned to cold ashes;	Ne how Arcite is brent to asshen colde;
And how Emelye was led homeward;	And how that lad was homward Emelye;
And thrice how the ladies did cry;	And thries how the ladyes gonne crye;
And thrice with their spears clattering;	And thries with hir speres claterynge;
Thrice ride all the fire about	Thries riden al the fyr aboute
Nor how the Greeks, with a huge company,	Ne how the Grekes, with an huge route,
Into the fire, that burned as if it were mad;	Into the fyr, that brente as it were wood;
And cups full of wine, and milk, and blood,	And coppes fulle of wyn, and milk, and blood,
And of their vestments, which they wore,	And of hire vestimentz, whiche that they were,
Nor how some threw their shields, and some their spears,	Ne how somme caste hir sheeld, and somme hir spere,
When the fire was great and burned fast;	Whan that the fyr was greet and brente faste;
Nor what jewels men threw in the fire,	Ne what jeweles men in the fyre caste,
Nor what she spoke, nor what was her desire;	Ne what she spak, ne what was hir desir;
Lighted the fire of funeral service;	Putte in the fyr of funeral servyse;
Nor how Emelye, as was the custom,	Ne how that Emelye, as was the gyse,
Nor what richness about his body is;	Ne what richesse aboute his body is;
Nor how Arcite lay among all this,	Ne how Arcite lay among al this,
The myrrh, the incense, with such great fragrance;	The mirre, th'encens, with al so greet odour;
And garlands, hanging with full many a flower;	And gerlandes, hangynge with ful many a flour;
And then with cloth of gold and with precious stones	And thanne with clooth of gold and with perrye,
And then with green wood and mixtures of spices,	And thanne with grene wode and spicerye,
And then with dry branches cut in thirds,	And thanne with drye stikkes cloven a thre,
Which was not accustomed to see the bright sun;	That was nat wont to seen the sonne bright;
Nor how frightened by the light was the ground,	Ne how the ground agast was of the light,
Fled for fear, when the wood was cut down;	Fledden for fere, whan the wode was falle;
Nor how the beasts and the birds all	Ne hou the beestes and the briddes alle
Nymphs, fawns and hamadryades (wood nymphs);	Nymphes, fawnes and amadrides;
In which they dwelt in rest and peace,	In which they woneden in reste and pees,
Disinherited of their habitation,	Disherited of hire habitacioun,
Nor how the gods ran up and down,	Ne hou the goddes ronnen up and doun,
How they were cut down shall not be told by me;	How they weren feld shal nat be toold for me;
Willow, elm, plane, ash, box, chestnut, linden, laurel,	Wylugh, elm, plane, assh, box, chasteyn, lynde, laurer,
Such as oak, fir, birch, aspen, alder, holm oak, poplar,	As ook, firre, birch, aspe, alder, holm, popler,
Nor also the names that the trees are called,	Ne eek the names that the trees highte,
But how the fire was made on high,	But how the fyr was maked upon highte,
There was first laid very many a load of straw.	Of stree first ther was leyd ful many a lode.
This is to say, the boughs were so broad.	This is to seyn, the bowes weren so brode.
And twenty fathom of breadth the sides stretched --	And twenty fadme of brede the armes straughte --
Which with its green top reached the heaven;	That with his grene top the hevene raughte;
Was at the service and the fire-making,	Was at the service and the fyr-makynge,
To do the office of funeral service.	To do the ritual of funeral service.
With fire in hand, as was at that time the custom,	With fyr in honde, as was that tyme the gyse,
And after that came woeful Emelye,	And after that cam woful Emelye,
Also Palamon, with a very large company;	Eek Palamon, with ful greet compaignye;
All full of honey, milk, and blood, and wine;	Al ful of hony, milk, and blood, and wyn;
With vessels of pure gold in their hands,	With vessels in hir hand of gold ful fyn,
And on that other side duke Theseus,	And on that oother syde duc Theseus,
Upon the right hand went old Egeus,	Upon the right hond wente olde Egeus,
The street is covered with exactly the same.	Right of the same is the strete ywrye.
Throughout the city by the main street,	Thurghout the citee by the maister strete,
With slow pace and eyes red and wet,	With slakke paas and eyen rede and wete,
Carried the bier upon their shoulders,	Upon hir shuldres caryeden the beere,
The noblest of the Greeks that were there	The nobleste of the Grekes that ther were
Toward the grove, as you shall later hear.	Toward the grove, as ye shul after heere.
And they rode forth slowly with sorrowful demeanor	And riden forth a paas with sorweful cheere
(Of pure gold was the quiver and also the fittings);	(Of brend gold was the caas and eek the harneys);
The third carried with him his Turkish bow	The thridde baar with hym his bowe Turkeys
Another held his spear upright in his hands,	Another his spere up on his hondes heeld,
Upon these steeds, that were large and white,	Upon thise steedes, that weren grete and white,
And covered with the coat of arms of Don Arcite.	And covered with the armes of daun Arcite.
That were equipped with trappings of steel all glittering,	That trapped were in steel al gliterynge,
Duke Theseus had three steeds brought forth,	Duc Theseus leet forth thre steedes brynge,
The more noble and rich in its degree,	The moore noble and riche in his degree,
In order that the ritual should be	In as muche as the servyce sholde be
The most pitiful of all the company.	The rewefulleste of al the compaignye.
And, excelling others in weeping, Emelye,	And, passynge othere of wepynge, Emelye,
In black clothes, all sprinkled with tears;	In clothes blake, ydropped al with teeres;
Then came this woeful Theban Palamon,	Tho cam this woful Theban Palamoun,
That resounds with the crying and the sound.	That roreth of the criyng and the soun.
When it was day, he brought him to the hall,	Whan it was day, he broghte hym to the halle,
And in order that all the people should see him,	And for the peple sholde seen hym alle,
Therewith he wept that it was a pity to hear.	Therwith he weep that pitee was to heere.
He laid him, with the face bare, on the bier;	He leyde hym, bare the visage, on the beere;
And in his hand a sword full bright and keen.	And in his hond a swerd ful bright and kene.
Also on his head a crown of green laurel,	Eek on his heed a coroune of laurer grene,
Upon his hands he had white gloves,	Upon his hondes hadde he gloves white,
With cloth of gold, the richest that he had.	With clooth of gold, the richeste that he hadde.
For a bier, and it all overspread	After a beere, and it al overspradde
And after this, Theseus has sent	And after this, Theseus hath ysent
And ride quickly at his commandment.	And ryde anon at his comandement.
His officers with swift feet they run	His officers with swifte feet they renne
In piles arranged to burn well.	In colpons wel arrayed for to brenne.
The old oaks, and lay them in a row	The okes olde, and leye hem on a rewe
And he ordered immediately to hack and hew	And leet comande anon to hakke and hewe
Of a funeral he might fully perform.	Funeral he myghte al accomplice.
His lament, and for love his hot fires,	His compleynte, and for love his hoote fires,
Where he had his amorous desires,	Ther as he hadde his amorouse desires,
That in that same grove, sweet-smelling and green,	That in that selve grove, swoote and grene,
Had the battle between them for love,	Hadden for love the bataille hem bitwene,
That there where first Arcite and Palamon	That ther as first Arcite and Palamoun
And at the last he concluded	And at the laste he took conclusioun
And also most honorable in (regard to) his rank.	And eek moost honurable in his degree.
Of good Arcite may best be made,	Of goode Arcite may best ymaked be,
Considered now where the tomb	Caste now wher that the sepulture
The people that they should comfort themselves.	The peple that they sholde hem reconforte.
To this effect, full wisely to exhort	To this effect, ful wisely to enhorte
And beyond all this yet he said much more	And over al this yet seyde he muchel moore
Death is an end of every worldly pain."	Deeth is an ende of every worldly soore."
And we are pilgrims, passing to and fro.	And we been pilgrymes, passynge to and fro.
This world is nothing but a thoroughfare full of woe,	This world nys but a thurghfare ful of wo,
"In all this world, who some time did not die.	"In al this world, that som tyme he ne deyde.
Just so there lived never a man," he said,	Right so ther lyvede never man," he seyde,
"Who did not live in earth to some extent	"That he ne lyvede in erthe in some degree,
And showed them examples and comparisons.	And shewed hem ensamples and liknesse.
Joy after woe, and woe after gladness,	Joye after wo, and wo after gladnesse,
As he had seen it change both up and down,	As he hadde seyn it chaunge bothe up and doun,
Who knew the changes of this world,	That knew this worldes transmutacioun,
Except for his old father Egeus,	Savynge his olde fader Egeus,
No man might comfort Theseus,	No man myghte gladen Theseus,
"Since thou haddest gold enough, and Emelye?"	"And haddest gold ynough, and Emelye?"
"Why wouldst thou be dead," these women cry,	"Why woldestow be deed," thise wommen crye,
Scratching of cheeks, also tearing of hair.	Cracchynge of chekes, rentynge eek of heer.
When Hector was brought, just recently slain,	Whan Ector was ybroght, al fressh yslayn,
There was no such great weeping, certainly,	So greet wepyng was ther noon, certayn,
For him there weep both child and man;	For hym ther wepeth bothe child and man;
In all the town for the death of this Theban.	In al the toun for deeth of this Theban.
Of old folk and folk of tender years	Of olde folk and folk of tendre yeeres
Infinite are the sorrows and the tears	Infinite been the sorwes and the teeres
That at the last certainly they die.	That at the laste certeinly they dye.
Or else fall in such illness	Or ellis fallen in swich maladye
That for the most part they so sorrow,	That for the moore part they sorwen so,
For in such cases women have such sorrow,	For in swich cas wommen have swich sorwe,
To tell how she wept both evening and morning?	To tellen how she weep bothe eve and morwe?
What helps it to waste the whole day	What helpeth it to tarien forth the day
Swooning, and carried her away from the corpse.	Swownynge, and baar hire fro the corps away.
And Theseus immediately took his sister	And Theseus his suster took anon
Emelye shrieked, and Palamon howls,	Shrighte Emelye, and howleth Palamon,
Now will I speak forth of Emelye.	Now wol I speken forth of Emelye.
Arcite is cold, may Mars guide his soul!	Arcite is coold, ther Mars his soule gye!
Of them, though they write of where they (the souls) dwell.	Of hem, though that they writen wher they dwelle.
I find nothing about souls in this register,	Of soules fynde I nat in this registre,
Therefore I stop; I am no theologian;	Therfore I stynte; I nam no divinistre;
Since I came never (there), I can not tell where.	As I cam nevere, I kan nat tellen wher.
His spirit changed house and went where,	His spirit chaunged hous and wente ther,
His last word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"	His laste word was, "Mercy, Emelye!"
But on his lady yet he cast his eye;	But on his lady yet caste he his ye;
His two eyes grew dark, and his breath failed,	Dusked his eyen two, and failled breeth,
Began to fail when the heart felt death.	Gan faillen whan the herte felte deeth.
That dwelled in his heart sick and sore,	That dwelled in his herte syk and soore,
The vital strength is lost and all gone.	The vital strengthe is lost and al ago.
And yet moreover, for in his two arms	And yet mooreover, for in his armes two
The cold of death, which had overcome him,	The coold of deeth, that hadde hym overcome,
For from his feet up to his breast had come	For from his feet up to his brest was come
And with that word his speech began to fail,	And with that word his speche faille gan,
Forget not Palamon, the gentle man."	Foryet nat Palamon, the gentil man."
And if ever you shall be a wife,	And if that evere ye shul ben a wyf,
Who serves you, and will do so all his life.	That serveth yow, and wol doon al his lyf.
So worthy to be loved as Palamon,	So worthy to ben loved as Palamon,
As Jupiter may have concern for my soul,	So Juppiter have of my soule part,
Nobility of character, and all that belongs to that art --	Fredom, and al that longeth to that art --
Wisdom, humbleness, rank, and noble ancestry,	Wysdom, humblesse, estaat, and heigh kynrede,
That is to say, truth, honor, knighthood,	That is to seyen, trouthe, honour, knyghthede,
With all the attendant attributes truly --	With alle circumstances trewely --
To speak specifically of a servant (of love),	To speken of a servaunt proprely,
And as Jupiter may guide my soul,	And Juppiter so wys my soule gye,
For love of you, and for my jealousy.	For love of yow, and for my jalousye.
Had strife and rancor many a day ago	Had strif and rancour many a day agon
For love of God, and listen to what I say.	For love of God, and herkneth what I seye.
And softly take me in your two arms,	And softe taak me in youre armes tweye,
Fare well, my sweet foe, my Emelye!	Fare wel, my sweete foo, myn Emelye!
Alone, without any company.	Allone, withouten any compaignye.
Now with his love, now in his cold grave	Now with his love, now in his colde grave
What is this world? What do people ask to have?	What is this world? What asketh men to have?
My heart's lady, ender of my life!	Myn hertes lady, endere of my lyf!
Alas, my heart's queen! Alas, my wife,	Allas, myn hertes queene! Allas, my wyf,
Alas, separation of our company!	Allas, departynge of oure compaignye!
That I have suffered for you, and so long!	That I for yow have suffred, and so longe!
Alas, the woe! Alas, the strong pains,	Allas, the wo! Allas, the peynes stronge,
Since my life can no longer endure.	Syn that my lyf may no lenger dure.
To you above every creature,	To yow aboven every creature,
But I bequeath the service of my ghost	But I biquethe the servyce of my goost
To you, my lady, whom I love most,	To yow, my lady, that I love moost,
Declare one small part of all my painful sorrows	Declare o point of alle my sorwes smerte
"The woeful spirit in my heart can not	"Naught may the woful spirit in myn herte
Then said he thus, as you shall after hear:	Thanne seyde he thus, as ye shal after heere:
For which he sends after Emelye,	For which he sendeth after Emelye,
This is the whole of it, that Arcite must die;	This al and som, that Arcita moot dye;
Fare well medicine! Go bear the man to church!	Fare wel phisik! Go ber the man to chirche!
And certainly, where Nature will not work,	And certeinly, ther Nature wol nat wirche,
Nature now has no power to control.	Nature hath now no dominacioun.
All is shattered in that region;	Al is tobrosten thilke regioun;
Vomit upward, nor downward laxative.	Vomyt upward, ne dounward laxatif.
Avails him neither, to preserve his life,	Hym gayneth neither, for to gete his lif,
Is destroyed by poison and corrupted matter.	Is shent with venym and corrupcioun.
The pipes of his lungs began to swell,	The pipes of his longes gonne to swelle,
Can not remove nor expel the poison.	Ne may the venym voyden ne expelle.
From that power called natural	Fro thilke vertu cleped natural
The power expulsive (to expel fluids), or animal,	The vertu expulsif, or animal,
Nor drink of herbs can be any help to him.	Ne drynke of herbes may ben his helpynge.
That neither blood letting at a vein, nor applying suction cups,	That neither veyne-blood, ne ventusynge,
Corrupts, and is left in the trunk of his body,	Corrupteth, and is in his bouk ylaft,
The clotted blood, despite any medical treatment,	The clothered blood, for any lechecraft,
At his heart increases more and more.	Encreesseth at his herte moore and moore.
But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.	But speke of Palamon and of Arcite.
Of this battle I will write no more,	Of this bataille I wol namoore endite,
There was no more but "Fare well, have good day!"	Ther was namoore but "Fare wel, have good day!"
And home went every man the direct way.	And hoom wente every man the righte way.
Out of his town a full day's journey.	Out of his toun a journee largely.
And honorably escorted the kings	And conveyed the kynges worthily
And held a feast for fully three days,	And fully heeld a feeste dayes three,
And gave them gifts in accordance with their ranks,	And yaf hem yiftes after hir degree,
And either side equal as the other's brother;	And eyther syde ylik as ootheres brother;
To put a stop to all rancor and ill-will,	To stynten alle rancour and envye,
For which anon duke Theseus had proclaimed,	For which anon duc Theseus leet crye,
No man there may call it cowardice.	Ther may no man clepen it cowardye.
He incurred no shameful blame for it;	It nas arretted hym no vileynye;
By men on foot, both yeomen and also foot soldiers --	With footmen, bothe yemen and eek knaves --
And also his steed driven forth with staves	And eke his steede dryven forth with staves
And dragged forth by arm, foot, and toe,	And haryed forth by arme, foot, and too,
One person alone, without others,	O persone allone, withouten mo,
Without having surrendered, and taken by twenty knights,	Unyolden, and with twenty knyghtes take,
For falling is nothing but an accident,	For fallyng nys nat but an aventure,
For truly there was no defeat.	For soothly ther was no disconfiture.
But (only) as a joust or a tournament;	But as a justes or a tourneiynge;
Nor was it considered any defeat (in battle)	Ne ther was holden no disconfitynge
For the foreign lords, as was right.	Unto the straunge lordes, as was right.
And made revel all the long night	And made revel al the longe nyght
Comforts and honors every man,	Conforteth and honoureth every man,
For which this noble duke, as he well knows how,	For which this noble duc, as he wel kan,
They drank, for they wanted to have their limbs cured.	They dronken, for they wolde hir lymes have.
Some had salves, and some had charms;	Somme hadden salves, and somme hadden charmes;
To other wounds and to broken arms	To othere woundes and to broken armes
Whose breastbone was pierced by a spear.	That with a spere was thirled his brest boon.
Although they (were) sorely hurt, and especially one,	Al were they soore yhurt, and namely oon,
That of them all there was no one slain,	That of hem alle was ther noon yslayn,
And of another thing they were as happy,	And of another thyng they weren as fayn,
He shall be healed of his injuries.	He shal been heeled of his maladye.
People said also that Arcite shall not dye;	Men seyde eek that Arcite shal nat dye;
He would not distress them all.	He nolde noght disconforten hem alle.
With all bliss and great solemnity.	With alle blisse and greet solempnitee.
Is come home to Athens, his city,	Is comen hoom to Atthenes his citee,
Duke Theseus, with all his company,	Duc Theseus, with al his compaignye,
And always crying for Emelye.	And alwey criynge after Emelye.
For he was yet conscious and alive,	For he was yet in memorie and alyve,
And brought in a bed very gently and quickly,	And in a bed ybrought ful faire and blyve,
Then was he cut out of his armor	Tho was he korven out of his harneys
With painful heart, to Theseus's palace.	With herte soor, to Theseus paleys.
Immediately he was carried out of the place,	Anon he was yborn out of the place,
He lay as black as any coal or crow,	As blak he lay as any cole or crowe,
His breast shattered by his saddlebow.	His brest tobrosten with his sadel-bowe.
That in the place he lay as if he were dead,	That in the place he lay as he were deed,
He hit himself on the top of his head,	He pighte hym on the pomel of his heed,
And before Arcite can take heed,	And er that Arcite may taken keep,
And leaped aside, and stumbled as he leaped;	And leep aside, and foundred as he leep;
For which his horse for fear began to turn,	For which his hors for fere gan to turne,
Sent from Pluto at the request of Saturn,	From Pluto sent at requeste of Saturne,
Out of the ground leaped an infernal fury,	Out of the ground a furie infernal sterte,
They all follow the favor of Fortune)	Thei folwen alle the favour of Fortune)
(For women, so to speak in general,	(For wommen, as to speken in comune,
And she to him cast a friendly eye	And she agayn hym caste a freendlich ye
Looking upward upon this Emelye;	Lokynge upward upon this Emelye;
He spurs from one end to the other of the large open space	He priketh endelong the large place
And on a war horse, to show his face,	And on a courser, for to shewe his face,
This fierce Arcite has taken off his helm,	This fierse Arcite hath of his helm ydon,
(Hear) what a miracle at once befell there.	Which a myracle ther bifel anon.
But listen to me, and stop the noise for a little,	But herkneth me, and stynteth noyse a lite,
The heralds, who full loudly yell and cry,	The heraudes, that ful loude yelle and crie,
The trumpeters, with the loud music,	The trompours, with the loude mynstralcie,
And, by my head, thou shalt be relieved soon."	And, by myn heed, thow shalt been esed soone."
Mars has his will, his knight has all his request,	Mars hath his wille, his knyght hath al his boone,
Saturn said, "Daughter, hold thy peace!	Saturnus seyde, "Doghter, hoold thy pees!
She said, "I am disgraced, doubtless."	She seyde, "I am ashamed, doutelees."
Until her tears fell in the lists?	Til that hir teeres in the lystes fille?
But weeps so, for lack of (having) her will,	But wepeth so, for wantynge of hir wille,
What says she now? What does this queen of love,	What seith she now? What dooth this queene of love,
It seemed that the lists should fall.	It semed that the lystes sholde falle.
For joy of this, so loud and clamorous indeed	For joye of this, so loude and heighe withalle
Immediately there is a noise of people begun	Anon ther is a noyse of peple bigonne
Who by his fortune has won her fairly."	That by his fortune hath hire faire ywonne."
Arcite of Thebes shall have Emelye,	Arcite of Thebes shal have Emelie,
I will be true judge, and no partisan.	I wol be trewe juge, and no partie.
He cried, "Stop! no more, for it is done!	He cryde, "Hoo! namoore, for it is doon!
Unto each one of the folk that fought thus	Unto the folk that foghten thus echon
And when Theseus had seen this sight,	And whan that Theseus hadde seyn this sighte,
Who sorrows now but woeful Palamon,	Who sorweth now but woful Palamoun,
By force and also by the agreed terms of battle.	By force and eek by composicioun.
He must abide, when he was caught,	He moste abyde, whan that he was caught,
His hardy heart could not help him:	His hardy herte myghte hym helpe naught:
But all for naught; he was brought to the stake.	But al for noght; he was broght to the stake.
So hit him Palamon before he was taken.	So hitte him Palamoun er he were take.
Is carried out of his saddle a sword's length,	Is born out of his sadel a swerdes lengthe,
And king Emetreus, despite all his strength,	And kyng Emetreus, for al his strengthe,
The strong king Lygurge is born down,	The stronge kyng Lygurge is born adoun,
Without having surrendered, and dragged to the stake.	Unyolden, and ydrawen to the stake.
And by the force of twenty he (Palamon) is taken	And by the force of twenty is he take
And made his sword deep in his flesh to bite,	And made his swerd depe in his flessh to byte,
This Palamon, as he fought with Arcite,	This Palamon, as he faught with Arcite,
The strong king Emetreus did seize	The stronge kyng Emetreus gan hente
For before the sun went unto its rest,	For er the sonne unto the reste wente,
Some time there is an end of every deed.	Som tyme an ende ther is of every dede.
Out runs red blood on both their sides.	Out renneth blood on bothe hir sydes rede.
The fervent strokes bite on their helms;	The jelous strokes on hir helmes byte;
Nor of his prey desires so the blood,	Ne of his praye desireth so the blood,
That is hunted, or maddened by his hunger,	That hunted is, or for his hunger wood,
Nor in Benmarin there is not so fierce a lion,	Ne in Belmarye ther nys so fel leon,
For jealous heart upon this Palamon.	For jelous herte upon this Palamon.
So cruel on the hunt as is Arcite	So crueel on the hunte as is Arcite
When her whelp is stolen when it is little,	Whan that hir whelp is stole whan it is lite,
There was not any tiger in the vale of Gargaphia,	Ther nas no tygre in the vale of Galgopheye,
Each has unhorsed the other of them two.	Unhorsed hath ech oother of hem tweye.
Met together, and (each) wrought woe to his opponent;	Togydre ymet, and wroght his felawe wo;
To refresh themselves and drink, if they wish.	Hem to refresshe and drynken, if hem leste.
And for a while Theseus makes them rest,	And some tyme dooth hem Theseus to reste,
Another on that other side is led away.	Another lad is on that oother syde.
As was the agreement, right there he must abide.	As forward was, right there he moste abyde.
Despite all he can do, and brought unto the stake;	Maugree his heed, and broght unto the stake;
He is hurt through the body and then taken,	He thurgh the body is hurt and sithen ytake,
And he hurtles him down with his horse;	And he hym hurtleth with his hors adoun;
On his feet he stabs with the broken shaft of his spear,	He foyneth on his feet with his tronchoun,
He rolls under foot as does a ball;	He rolleth under foot as dooth a bal;
He did thrust through the thickest of the throng;	He thurgh the thikkeste of the throng gan threste;
With mighty maces they break the bones to pieces.	With myghty maces the bones they tobreste.
Out burst the blood in strong red streams;	Out brest the blood with stierne stremes rede;
The helms they hew to pieces and cut into shreds	The helmes they tohewen and toshrede;
Out go the swords bright as silver;	Out goon the swerdes as the silver brighte;
Up spring spears twenty foot on height;	Up spryngen speres twenty foot on highte;
He feels the stabbing through the breast-bone.	He feeleth thurgh the herte-spoon the prikke.
There splinter spears upon thick shields;	Ther shyveren shaftes upon sheeldes thikke;
There people see who can joust and who can ride;	Ther seen men who kan juste and who kan ryde;
In go the spears very firmly in the lance-rests;	In goon the speres ful sadly in arrest;
There is no more to say, but from west and east	Ther is namoore to seyn, but west and est
Now trumpets and bugles ring loud.	Now ryngen trompes loude and clarioun.
The heralds left their spurring up and down;	The heraudes lefte hir prikyng up and doun;
"Do now your duty, proud young knights!"	"Do now youre devoir, yonge knyghtes proude!"
Then the gates were shut, and cried was aloud:	Tho were the gates shet, and cried was loude:
So that in their total number there would be no deception,	That in hir nombre gyle were ther noon,
When every one of their names were read,	Whan that hir names rad were everichon,
And in two fair ranks they arrange themselves.	And in two renges faire they hem dresse.
In worthiness, nor in status, nor age,	Of worthynesse, ne of estaat, ne age,
That any one had advantage over the other	That any hadde of oother avauntage
For there was no one so wise that could say	For ther was noon so wys that koude seye
There were not two such companies,	Ther nere swiche compaignyes tweye,
So evenly, without variation,	So evene, withouten variacioun,
In all the world, to seek up and down,	In al the world, to seken up and doun,
With white banner and hardy countenance and face.	With baner whyt and hardy chiere and face.
Is under Venus, eastward in the place,	Is under Venus, estward in the place,
And in that same moment Palamon	And in that selve moment Palamon
Arcite, and also the hundred of his party,	Arcite, and eek the hondred of his parte,
And westward, through the gates under Mars,	And westward, thurgh the gates under Marte,
Unto the seats press all the crowd.	Unto the seetes preesseth al the route.
And other ladies about in tiers.	And othere ladys in degrees aboute.
Ypolita the queen, and Emelye,	Ypolita the queene, and Emelye,
When Theseus was set very splendidly and nobly,	Whan set was Theseus ful riche and hye,
It was not yet fully prime (nine a.m.) of the day	It nas nat of the day yet fully pryme
And they come to the lists in good time.	And to the lystes come they by tyme.
And thus they pass throughout the city,	And thus they passen thurghout the citee,
And after that another company	And after that another compaignye
And after rode the queen and Emelye,	And after rood the queene and Emelye,
These two Thebans upon either side,	Thise two Thebans upon either syde,
Fully like a lord this noble duke did ride,	Ful lik a lord this noble duc gan ryde,
Hung with cloth of gold, and not with serge.	Hanged with clooth of gold, and nat with sarge.
In battle array, throughout all the city,	By ordinance, thurghout the citee large,
And to the lists rides the company,	And to the lystes rit the compaignye,
Up go the trumpets and the melody,	Up goon the trompes and the melodye,
He desires no destruction of blood!"	He wilneth no destruccion of blood!"
So loudly they cried with merry voices,	So loude cride they with murie stevene,
The voice of people touched the heaven,	The voys of peple touchede the hevene,
Go now on your way; this is the lord's will."	Gooth now youre wey; this is the lordes wille."
With long sword and with mace fight your fill.	With long swerd and with mace fighteth youre fille.
God give you success! Go forth and lay on fast!	God spede you! Gooth forth and ley on faste!
The tournament shall last no longer.	No lenger shal the turneiynge laste.
On either side, or else should slay his opponent,	On outher syde, or elles sleen his make,
And if so happen that the chieftain be taken	And if so falle the chieftayn be take
But thither he must (go) by force, and remain there.	But thider he shal by force, and there abyde.
And not slain, but be brought unto the stake	And noght slayn, but be broght unto the stake
And he who is at a disadvantage shall be taken	And he that is at meschief shal be take
Let him thrust, if he wishes, on foot, to defend himself.	Foyne, if hym list, on foote, hymself to were.
More than one course with a sharply honed spear;	But o cours with a sharpe ygrounde spere;
And no man shall ride at his opponent	Ne no man shal unto his felawe ryde
May no man neither draw, nor bear it by his side.	No man ne drawe, ne bere it by his syde.
Nor short sword, to stab with piercing point,	Ne short swerd, for to stoke with poynt bitynge,
Send into the lists or bring there;	Into the lystes sende or thider brynge;
No sort of arrow, nor battle-axe, nor short knife	No maner shot, ne polax, ne short knyf
He will modify his previous plan.	He wol his firste purpos modifye.
Wherefore, to arrange matters so that they shall not die,	Wherfore, to shapen that they shal nat dye,
Of mortal battle now in this undertaking.	Of mortal bataille now in this emprise.
To gentle blood to fight in the manner	To gentil blood to fighten in the gyse
Considered that it would be destruction	Considered that it were destruccioun
"The lord has of his great sound judgment	"The lord hath of his heigh discrecioun
Then showed he the mighty duke's will:	Tho shewed he the myghty dukes wille:
And when he saw the people all still of noise,	And whan he saugh the peple of noyse al stille,
Until all the noise of people was done,	Til al the noyse of peple was ydo,
And also to hear his command and his decision.	And eek to herkne his heste and his sentence.
In order to see him, and to do great reverence,	Hym for to seen, and doon heigh reverence,
The people press thither full soon	The peple preesseth thiderward ful soone
Arrayed exactly as if he were a god on a throne.	Arrayed right as he were a god in trone.
Duke Theseus was set at a window,	Duc Theseus was at a wyndow set,
Honored, were fetched into the palace.	Honured, were into the paleys fet.
Until the Theban knights, both equally	Til that the Thebane knyghtes, bothe yliche
Remained yet in the chamber of his rich palace	Heeld yet the chambre of his paleys riche
By the music and noise that was made,	With mynstralcie and noyse that was maked,
Long after the sun began to rise.	Longe after that the sonne gan to sprynge.
Thus was the hall full of conjecturing,	Thus was the halle ful of divynynge,
"He has a battle-ax of twenty pounds of weight."	"He hath a sparth of twenty pound of wighte."
Some said he looked grim, and he would fight:	Somme seyde he looked grymme, and he wolde fighte:
Some with the bald, some with the thickly haired;	Somme with the balled, somme with the thikke herd;
Some held with him with the black beard,	Somme helden with hym with the blake berd,
Some said thus, some said "it shall be so";	Somme seyden thus, somme seyde "it shal be so";
Conjecturing about these two Theban knights.	Dyvynynge of thise Thebane knyghtes two.
Here three, there ten, debating,	Heere thre, ther ten, holdynge hir questioun,
That blow bloody sounds in the battle;	That in the bataille blowen blody sounes;
Pipes, trumpets, kettle drums, bugles,	Pypes, trompes, nakers, clariounes,
With short staves, thick as they can go;	With shorte staves, thikke as they may goon;
Yeomen on foot, and foot soldiers many a one	Yemen on foote, and communes many oon
With file and hammer are spurring to and fro;	With fyle and hamer prikynge to and fro;
Gnawing, and fast the armorers also	Gnawynge, and faste the armurers also
The steeds frothing on the golden bridles	The fomy steedes on the golden brydel
Where it is needed they were not at all idle;	There as nede is they weren no thyng ydel;
Fitting the shields with straps, fastening with laces --	Giggynge of sheeldes, with layneres lacynge --
Knights of (their) retinues, and also squires	Knyghtes of retenue, and eek squieres
Lords in richly decorated robes on their coursers,	Lordes in parementz on hir courseres,
Gold-colored helms, coats of mail, tunics with heraldic devices;	Gold-hewen helmes, coats of mail, cote-armures;
The bright shields, horses' head-armor, and horse-armor,	The sheeldes brighte, testeres, and trappures,
Of goldsmiths' works, of embroidery, and of steel;	Of goldsmythrye, of browdynge, and of steel;
So exotic and so rich, and wrought so well	So unkouth and so riche, and wroght so weel
There canst thou see preparation of armor	Ther maystow seen devisynge of harneys
Of lords upon steeds and palfreys.	Of lordes upon steedes and palfreys.
And to the palace there rode many a company	And to the paleys rood ther many a route
Noise and clattering of horses and armor	Of hors and harneys noyse and claterynge
And in the morning, when day did spring,	And on the morwe, whan that day gan sprynge,
Unto their rest they went at nightfall.	Unto hir reste wenten they at nyght.
Early, to see the great fight,	Eerly, for to seen the grete fight,
But because they must rise	But by the cause that they sholde ryse
And spend that day in Venus's noble service.	And spenden it in Venus heigh servyse.
That all that Monday they joust and dance,	That al that Monday justen they and daunce,
Made every person to be in such delight	Made every wight to been in swich plesaunce
And also the pleasing season of that May	And eek the lusty seson of that May
The essential part, for which I began.	The grete effect, for which that I bygan.
And tell you as plainly as I can	And telle yow as pleynly as I kan
Of Mars, and of Venus, goddess of love,	Of Mars, and of Venus, goddesse of love,
Now I will stop (speaking) of the gods above,	Now wol I stynten of the goddes above,
Weep now no more; I will fulfill thy desire."	Weep now namoore; I wol thy lust fulfille."
I am thy grandfather, ready (to do) as you wish;	I am thyn aiel, redy at thy wille;
Which daily causes such dissension.	That causeth al day swich divisioun.
Although you are not of one (the same) temperament,	Al be ye noght of o compleccioun,
Between you there must be peace sometime,	Bitwixe yow ther moot be som tyme pees,
Shall have his lady, as thou hast promised him.	Shal have his lady, as thou hast him hight.
So that Palamon, who is thine own knight,	That Palamon, that is thyn owene knyght,
Now weep no more; I shall do my diligence	Now weep namoore; I shal doon diligence
My (astrological) aspect is the father of pestilence.	My lookyng is the fader of pestilence.
The dark treasons, and the old plots;	The derke tresons, and the castes olde;
And mine are the cold maladies,	And myne be the maladyes colde,
I slew Sampson, shaking the pillar;	I slow Sampsoun, shakynge the piler;
Upon the miner or the carpenter.	Upon the mynour or the carpenter.
The falling of the towers and of the walls	The fallynge of the toures and of the walles
While I dwell in the (zodiacal) sign of the lion.	Whil I dwelle in the signe of the leoun.
I exact vengeance and do full punishment,	I do vengeance and pleyn correccioun,
The grumbling, and the secret poisoning;	The groynynge, and the pryvee empoysonyng;
The murmur (of discontent) and the churls' rebelling,	The murmure and the cherles rebellyng,
Mine is the killing and hanging by the throat,	Myn is the stranglyng and hangyng by the throte,
Mine is the imprisonment in the dark cell;	Myn is the prison in the derke cote;
Mine is the drowning in the sea so dark;	Myn is the drenchyng in the see so wan;
Has more power than any man knows.	Hath moore power than woot any man.
"My orbit, that has so wide (a course) to turn,	"My cours, that hath so wyde for to turne,
He found a remedy for all this strife.	Of al this strif he gan remedie fynde.
Although it is against his natural disposition,	Al be it that it is agayn his kynde,
Saturn anon, to stop strife and fear,	Saturne anon, to stynten strif and drede,
One can outrun the old but not outwit them.	Men may the olde atrenne and noght atrede.
In old age is both wisdom and experience;	In elde is bothe wysdom and usage;
As is truly said, old age has a great advantage;	As sooth is seyd, elde hath greet avantage;
That he full soon has pleased every side.	That he ful soone hath plesed every part.
Found in his old experience a plan	Foond in his olde experience an art
Who knew so many of old adventures,	That knew so manye of aventures olde,
That Jupiter was hard put to stop it,	That Juppiter was bisy it to stente,
And Mars, the stern god powerful in arms,	And Mars, the stierne god armypotente,
Between Venus, the goddess of love,	Bitwixe Venus, the goddesse of love,
Because of that same grant, in the heaven above,	For thilke grauntyng, in the hevene above,
And right away such strife there is begun,	And right anon swich strif ther is bigonne,
As happy as a fowl is for the bright sun.	As fayn as fowel is of the brighte sonne.
Arcite at once is gone unto his lodging,	Arcite anon unto his in is fare,
And thus with joy and hope to fare well	And thus with joye and hope wel to fare
For which he (Arcite) gave to Mars honor and glory.	For which he yaf to Mars honour and glorie.
And with that sound he heard a murmuring	And with that soun he herde a murmurynge
The statue of Mars began to ring its coat of mail,	The statue of Mars bigan his hauberk rynge,
With more other rites; and at the last	With othere rytes mo; and atte laste
And he cast more incense into the fire,	And moore encens into the fyr he caste,
And Arcite immediately raised up his hand,	And Arcita anon his hand up haf,
A sweet smell the ground at once yielded up,	A sweete smel the ground anon up yaf,
That it began to illuminate all the temple;	That it gan al the temple for to lighte;
The fires upon the altar burned (so) brightly	The fyres brenden upon the auter brighte
Of which Arcite was somewhat afraid.	Of which Arcita somwhat hym agaste.
The rings that hung on the temple door,	The rynges on the temple dore that honge,
The prayer of Arcite the strong stopped,	The preyere stynt of Arcita the stronge,
Give me victory; I ask of thee no more."	Yif me [victorie]; I aske thee namoore."
Now, lord, have pity upon my painful sorrows;	Now, lord, have routhe upon my sorwes soore;
And be thy true servant while I live.	And ben thy trewe servant whil I lyve.
Of razor nor of shears, I will give thee,	Of rasour nor of shere, I wol thee yive,
That never yet felt injury	That nevere yet ne felte offensioun
My beard, my hair, that hangs long down,	My beerd, myn heer, that hongeth long adoun,
And also I will bind myself to this vow:	And eek to this avow I wol me bynde:
And evermore, until that day I die,	And everemo, unto that day I dye,
And all the arms of my company,	And alle the armes of my compaignye,
And in thy temple I will hang my banner	And in thy temple I wol my baner honge
In thy pleasure and in thy strong crafts,	In thy plesaunce and in thy craftes stronge,
Over any place, and always most labor	Of any place, and alwey moost labouren
I will most honor thy most excellent temple	Thy sovereyn temple wol I moost honouren
Mine be the labor, and thine be the glory!	Myn be the travaille, and thyn be the glorie!
And bring it about so that I have victory tomorrow.	And do that I tomorwe have victorie.
As well as that same fire now burns me,	As wel as thilke fyr now brenneth me,
Then help me, lord, tomorrow in my battle,	Thanne help me, lord, tomorwe in my bataille,
Of thee my strength can not avail.	Of thee ne may my strengthe noght availle.
And well I know, without help or grace	And wel I woot, withouten help or grace
I must win her with strength in the lists,	I moot with strengthe wynne hire in the place,
And well I know, before she may promise me mercy,	And wel I woot, er she me mercy heete,
Nor cares never whether I sink or swim.	Ne reccheth nevere wher I synke or fleete.
For she that causes me to endure all this woe	For she that dooth me al this wo endure
Than ever was any living creature,	That evere was any lyves creature,
And, as I suppose, injured most by love	And, as I trowe, with love offended moost
Have pity as well upon my painful sufferings.	Have routhe as wel upon my peynes smerte.
For that same sorrow that was in thy heart,	For thilke sorwe that was in thyn herte,
And found thee lying by his wife, alas! --	And foond thee liggynge by his wyf, allas! --
When Vulcan had caught thee in his snare	Whan Vulcanus hadde caught thee in his las
Although once things went wrong for you,	Although thee ones on a tyme mysfille,
And haddest her in arms as you wished --	And haddest hire in armes at thy wille --
Of fair, young, fresh Venus the noble,	Of faire, yonge, fresshe Venus free,
When that thou enjoyed the beauty	Whan that thow usedest the beautee
In which thou once burned for desire,	In which thow whilom brendest for desir,
Then pray I thee to have pity upon my pain.	Thanne preye I thee to rewe upon my pyne.
Thy godhead, so that I may be one of thine,	Thy godhede, that I may been oon of thyne,
And that my power be worthy to serve	And that my myght be worthy for to serve
If it so be that my youth may deserve,	If so be that my youthe may deserve,
Accept of me my sorrowful sacrifice.	Accepte of me my pitous sacrifise.
And grants them fortune as it pleases thee to command.	And hem fortunest as thee lyst devyse,
All the control of arms in thy hand,	Of armes al the brydel in thyn hond,
And hast in every reign and every land	And hast in every regne and every lond
Of Thrace art honored and considered lord,	Of Trace honoured art and lord yholde,
Right thus to Mars he said his prayer:	Right thus to Mars he seyde his orisoun:
With sorrowful heart and intense devotion,	With pitous herte and heigh devocioun,
With all the rites of his pagan manner (of worship).	With alle the rytes of his payen wyse.
Of fierce Mars to do his sacrifice,	Of fierse Mars to doon his sacrifise,
Arcite has walked unto the temple	Arcite unto the temple walked is
The next (planetary) hour of Mars following this,	The nexte houre of Mars folwynge this,
This is the substance; there is no more to say.	This is th'effect; ther is namoore to seye.
And home she goes at once the nearest way.	And hoom she goth anon the nexte weye.
Diana, and in thy power."	Dyane, and in thy disposicioun."
And said, "What does this mean, alas?	And seyde, "What amounteth this, allas?
For which this Emelye was astonished,	For which this Emelye astoned was,
And forth she went and vanished;	And forth she wente and made a vanysshynge;
Of the goddess clatter fast and ring,	Of the goddesse clateren faste and rynge,
And with that word, the arrows in the quiver	And with that word, the arwes in the caas
Thy destiny concerning love, as in this situation."	Thyn aventure of love, as in this cas."
Shall declare to thee, before thou go hence,	Shulle thee declaren, er that thou go henne,
The fires which burn on my altar	The fires which that on myn auter brenne
Farwell, for I can stay no longer .	Farwel, for I ne may no lenger dwelle.
Who have for thee so much care and woe,	That han for thee so muchel care and wo,
Thou shalt be wedded unto one of those	Thou shalt ben wedded unto oon of tho
And by eternal word written and confirmed,	And by eterne word writen and confermed,
Among the high gods it is affirmed,	Among the goddes hye it is affermed,
And said, "Daughter, cease thy sadness.	And seyde, "Doghter, stynt thyn hevynesse.
With bow in hand, just like a huntress,	With bowe in honde, right as an hunteresse,
And right then Diana did appear,	And therwithal Dyane gan appeere,
And wept that it was a pity to hear.	And weep that it was pitee for to heere.
But simply for fear has she cried thus,	But oonly for the feere thus hath she cried,
That she was well nigh mad and began to cry,	That she was wel ny mad and gan to crye,
For which so sorely frightened was Emelye	For which so soore agast was Emelye
As if it were many bloody drops;	As it were blody dropes many oon;
And at the brand's end (the fire) ran out straightway	And at the brondes ende out ran anon
As these wet brands do in their burning,	As doon thise wete brondes in hir brennynge,
And as it quenched it made a roaring sound,	And as it queynte it made a whistelynge,
That other fire was quenched and all gone;	That oother fyr was queynt and al agon;
And rekindled again, and after that straightway	And quyked agayn, and after that anon
For right away one of the fires quenched	For right anon oon of the fyres queynte
While Emelye was thus in her prayer.	Whil Emelye was thus in hir preyere.
The fires burn brightly upon the altar,	The fires brenne upon the auter cleere,
And while I live, as a maiden I will serve thee."	And whil I lyve, a mayde I wol thee serve."
Thou care for and well conserve my maidenhood,	My maydenhede thou kepe and wel conserve,
Since thou art maiden and guardian of us all,	Syn thou art mayde and kepere of us alle,
The bitter tears that fall on my cheeks.	The bittre teeris that on my chekes falle.
Behold, goddess of clean chastity,	Bihoold, goddesse of clene chastitee,
Send me him who most desires me.	As sende me hym that moost desireth me.
That I must by necessity have one of them two,	That I shal nedes have oon of hem two,
And if it so be thou wilt not do me grace,	And if so be thou wolt nat do me grace,
Will be quenched, or turned to another place.	Be queynt, or turned in another place.
And all their intense torment, and their fire	And al hir bisy torment, and hir fir
That all their hot love and their desire,	That al hire hoote love and hir desir,
And turn away their hearts from me so	And fro me turne awey hir hertes so
Send love and peace between them two,	As sende love and pees bitwixe hem two,
This grace I pray thee and ask no more,	This grace I preye thee withoute moore,
And also Arcite, who loves me so painfully,	And eek Arcite, that loveth me so soore,
And Palamon, that has such love to me,	And Palamon, that hath swich love to me,
Now help me, lady, since you can and know how,	Now help me, lady, sith ye may and kan,
I do not desire to know company of man.	Noght wol I knowe compaignye of man.
And not to be a wife and be with child.	And noght to ben a wyf and be with childe.
And to walk in the wild woods,	And for to walken in the wodes wilde,
A maiden, and love hunting and the chase,	A mayde, and love huntynge and venerye,
I am, thou knowest, yet of thy company,	I am, thow woost, yet of thy compaignye,
Nor never will I be no lover nor wife.	Ne nevere wol I be no love ne wyf.
Desire to be a maiden all my life,	Desire to ben a mayden al my lyf,
Chaste goddess, well knowest thou that I	Chaste goddesse, wel wostow that I
Keep me from thy vengeance and thy ire,	As keepe me fro thy vengeaunce and thyn ire,
Full many a year, and knowest what I desire,	Ful many a yeer, and woost what I desire,
Goddess of maidens, whom my heart hast known	Goddesse of maydens, that myn herte hast knowe
Queen of the dark and low reign of Pluto,	Queene of the regne of Pluto derk and lowe,
To whom both heaven and earth and sea is visible,	To whom bothe hevene and erthe and see is sene,
"O chaste goddess of the green woods,	"O chaste goddesse of the wodes grene,
Unto Diana she spoke as you may hear:	Unto Dyane she spak as ye may heere:
When the fire was kindled, with a pitiful expression	Whan kyndled was the fyr, with pitous cheere
In Statius' Thebaid and such old books.	In Stace of Thebes and thise bookes olde.
Two fires on the altar did she kindle,	Two fyres on the auter gan she beete,
Was set upon her head full fair and suitable.	Upon hir heed was set ful fair and meete.
A crown of an evergreen oak	A coroune of a grene ook cerial
Her bright hair was combed, all loose;	Hir brighte heer was kembd, untressed al;
But it is good for a man to be without restriction (speak freely).	But it is good a man been at his large.
To one who means well it would be no matter of concern;	To hym that meneth wel it were no charge;
And yet it would be a pleasure to hear all.	And yet it were a game to heeren al.
Unless it be some thing in general;	But it be any thing in general;
But how she did her rite I dare not tell,	But hou she dide hir ryte I dar nat telle,
This Emelye, with gentle heart,	This Emelye, with herte debonaire,
The temple smoking (with incense), full of fair cloths,	Smokynge the temple, ful of clothes faire,
There lacked nothing (needed) to do her sacrifice.	Ther lakked noght to doon hir sacrifise.
The horns full of mead, as was the custom --	The hornes fulle of meeth, as was the gyse --
That is needed for the sacrifice;	That to the sacrifice longen shal;
The incense, the cloths, and all the rest	Th'encens, the clothes, and the remenant al
They had the fire full readily with them,	Ful redily with hem the fyr they hadde,
Her maidens, whom she led thither with her,	Hir maydens, that she thider with hire ladde,
And to the temple of Diana did hasten.	And to the temple of Dyane gan hye.
Began to go to Venus' temple,	Bigan to Venus temple for to gon,
The third planetary hour after Palamon	The thridde houre inequal that Palamon
And with glad heart he went home very soon.	And with glad herte he wente hym hoom ful soone.
Yet he knew well that his request was granted,	Yet wiste he wel that graunted was his boone,
For though the sign showed a delay,	For thogh the signe shewed a delay,
That his prayer was accepted that day.	That his preyere accepted was that day.
And made a sign, whereby he understood	And made a signe, wherby that he took
But at the last the statue of Venus shook,	But atte laste the statue of Venus shook,
Although I tell not now his observances;	Al telle I noght as now his observaunces;
He did his sacrifice, and that quickly,	His sacrifice he dide, and that anon,
When the prayer of Palamon was done,	Whan the orison was doon of Palamon,
Give me my love, thou blessed dear lady."	Yif me my love, thow blisful lady deere."
This is the substance and goal of my prayer:	This is th'effect and ende of my preyere:
Though Arcite win her to be his wife.	Though that Arcita wynne hire to his wyf.
Then I care not, when I have lost my life,	Thanne rekke I noght, whan I have lost my lyf,
That Arcite stab me through the heart.	That Arcita me thurgh the herte bere.
Then I pray thee, tomorrow with a spear	Thanne preye I thee, tomorwe with a spere
And if you will not (do) so, my lady sweet,	And if ye wol nat so, my lady sweete,
And on thy altar, whether I ride or walk (whatever I do),	And on thyn auter, where I ride or go,
I will worship thy temple evermore,	Thy temple wol I worshipe everemo,
That if you please, I shall well have my love.	That if yow list, I shal wel have my love.
Your power is so great in heaven above	Youre vertu is so greet in hevene above
For though it be true that Mars is god of arms,	For though so be that Mars is god of armes,
So that I have my lady in my arms.	So that I have my lady in myne armes.
To have victory over them, or they over me,	To have victorie of hem, or they of me,
I care not if it may better be	I recche nat but it may bettre be
Find thou the manner how and in what way:	Fynd thow the manere hou and in what wyse:
But I would have fully possession	But I wolde have fully possessioun
Nor fame for deeds of arms proclaimed everywhere;	Of pris of armes blowen up and doun;
Nor renown in this case, nor vain glory	Ne renoun in this cas, ne veyne glorie
Nor do I ask to have victory tomorrow,	Ne I ne axe nat tomorwe to have victorie,
I care not to boast of arms	I kepe noght of armes for to yelpe,
I make that my vow, providing you help me!	That make I myn avow, so ye me helpe!
And make war always against chastity.	And holden werre alwey with chastitee.
According to my power (as much as I can), be thy true servant,	Emforth my myght, thy trewe servant be,
As surely as I shall for evermore,	As wisly as I shal for everemoore,
My thought and seest what harms I feel!'	My thought and seest what harmes that I feele!'
But `Mercy, lady bright, who knowest well	But `Mercy, lady bright, that knowest weele
I am so befuddled that I can not say (anything)	I am so confus that I kan noght seye
My heart can not reveal my harms;	Myn herte may myne harmes nat biwreye;
The effects nor the torments of my hell;	Th'effectes ne the tormentz of myn helle;
Alas! I do not have any language to tell	Allas! I ne have no langage to telle
And take my humble prayer to thy heart.	And taak myn humble preyere at thyn herte.
Have pity on my bitter, smarting tears,	Have pitee of my bittre teeris smerte,
For that same love thou haddest to Adonis,	For thilke love thow haddest to Adoon,
Daughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcan,	Doughter to Jove and spouse of Vulcanus,
"Fairest of the fair, O lady mine, Venus,	"Faireste of faire, O lady myn, Venus,
And painful heart he said as you shall hear:	And herte soor he seyde as ye shal heere:
And down he kneels, and with humble expression	And doun he kneleth, and with humble cheere
Unto the lists where her temple was,	Unto the lystes ther hire temple was,
And in her (planetary) hour he walks forth slowly	And in hir houre he walketh forth a pas
I mean Venus, honorable and worshipful.	I mene Venus, honurable and digne.
To the blessed gracious Citherea --	Unto the blissful Citherea benign --
He rose to go on his pilgrimage	He roos to wenden on his pilgrymage
Yet sang the lark) and Palamon right then	Yet the larke sang) and Palamon right then
(Although it was not day by two hours,	(Although it nere nat day by houres two,
When Palamon heard the lark sing	Whan Palamon the larke herde synge
The Sunday night, before day began to spring,	The Sonday nyght, er day bigan to sprynge,
Now comes the point, and listen if you please.	Now cometh the point, and herkneth if yow leste.
But (speak only) of the substance; that seems to me the best.	But al th' effect; that thynketh me the beste.
I now make no mention of all this,	Of al this make I now no mencioun,
What hounds lie down on the floor --	What houndes liggen on the floor adoun --
What hawks sit on the perch above,	What haukes sitten on the perche above,
Or which of them can dance best and sing,	Or which of hem kan dauncen best and synge,
What ladies are fairest or best in dancing,	What ladyes fairest been or best daunsynge,
Nor who sat first nor last upon the dais,	Ne who sat first ne last upon the deys,
The rich adornment of Theseus' palace,	The riche array of Theseus paleys,
The great gifts to every one,	The grete yiftes to the meeste and leeste,
The music, the service at the feast,	The mynstralcye, the service at the feeste,
Of any rank could do better.	Of noon estaat ne koude amenden it.
That people still believe that the wit of no man	That yet men wenen that no mannes wit
To entertain them and do them all honor	To esen hem and doon hem al honour
And provided them lodging, each one according to his rank,	And inned hem, everich at his degree,
When he had brought them into his city,	Whan he had broght hem into his citee,
This Theseus, this duke, this worthy knight,	This Theseus, this duc, this worthy knyght,
About nine a.m., and in the town dismounted.	Aboute pryme, and in the toun alight.
Are come to the city on the Sunday	Been on the Sonday to the citee come
And in this manner these lords, one and all,	And in this wise thise lordes, alle and some,
Full many a tame lion and leopard.	Ful many a tame leon and leopart.
About this king there ran on all sides	Aboute this kyng ther ran on every part
For love and for the benefit of chivalry.	For love and for encrees of chivalrye.
For trust well that dukes, earls, kings	For trusteth wel that dukes, erles, kynges
Very richly in every detail.	Ful richely in alle maner thynges.
All armed, except for their heads, in all their equipment,	Al armed, save hir heddes, in al hir gere,
He had a hundred lords with him there,	An hundred lordes hadde he with hym there,
A tame eagle, white as any lily.	An egle tame, as any lilye whyt.
Upon his hand he carried for his delight	Upon his hand he bar for his deduyt
A garland, fresh and pleasing to look upon.	A gerland, fressh and lusty for to sene.
Upon his head he wore of green laurel	Upon his heed he wered of laurer grene
His voice was like a trumpet thundering.	His voys was as a trompe thonderynge.
I reckon his age at five and twenty years.	Of fyve and twenty yeer his age I caste.
And as a lion he cast about his look.	And as a leon he his lookyng caste.
Between yellow and somewhat mingled with black;	Bitwixen yelow and somdel blak ymeynd;
A few freckles were sprinkled in his face,	A fewe frakenes in his face yspreynd,
His lips round, his color was ruddy;	His lippes rounde, his colour was sangwyn;
His nose was high, his eyes bright lemon yellow,	His nose was heigh, his eyen bright citryn,
And that was yellow, and glittered like the sun.	And that was yelow, and glytered as the sonne.
His curly hair like rings was run (fashioned),	His crispe heer lyk rynges was yronne,
Brimful of rubies red as sparkling fire;	Bret-ful of rubyes rede as fyr sparklynge;
His saddle was newly adorned with pure gold;	His sadel was of brend gold newe ybete;
Adorned with pearls white and round and big;	Couched with perles white and rounde and grete;
His tunic with his coat of arms was of cloth of Tarsia (in Turkestan)	His cote-armure was of clooth of Tars
Came riding like the god of arms, Mars.	Cam ridynge lyk the god of armes, Mars.
Covered in cloth of gold, well decorated (with geometric patterns),	Covered in clooth of gold, dyapred weel,
Upon a reddish-brown steed with trappings of steel,	Upon a steede bay trapped in steel,
The great Emetreus, the king of India,	The grete Emetreus, the kyng of Inde,
With Arcite, as people find in histories,	With Arcita, in stories as men fynde,
Very well armed, with stern and stout hearts.	Armed ful wel, with hertes stierne and stoute.
Wearing collars of gold, and rings for leashes filed round.	Colered of gold, and tourettes fyled rounde.
And followed him with muzzles securely bound,	And folwed hym with mosel faste ybounde,
To hunt for the lion or the deer,	To hunten at the leoun or the deer,
Twenty and more, as big as any steer,	Twenty and mo, as grete as any steer,
About his chariot there went white wolfhounds,	Aboute his chaar ther wenten white alauntz,
Of fine rubies and of diamonds.	Of fyne rubyes and of dyamauntz.
Upon his head, set full of bright stones,	Upon his heed, set ful of stones brighte,
A wreath of gold, thick as an arm, of huge weight,	A wrethe of gold, arm-greet, of huge wighte,
Like any raven's feather it shone because of its blackness;	As any ravenes fethere it shoon for blak;
He had a bear's skin, coal-black because of age.	He hadde a beres skyn, col-blak for old.
With claws yellow and bright as any gold,	With nayles yelewe and brighte as any gold,
Instead of a tunic with his coat of arms over his armor,	In stede of cote-armure over his harnays,
With four white bulls in the traces.	With foure white boles in the trays.
He stood full high upon a chariot of gold,	Ful hye upon a chaar of gold stood he,
And as was the fashion in his country,	And as the gyse was in his contree,
His shoulders broad, his arms round and long;	His shuldres brode, his armes rounde and longe;
His limbs large, his muscles hard and strong,	His lymes grete, his brawnes harde and stronge,
With shaggy hairs on his stout brows;	With kempe heeris on his browes stoute;
They glowed between yellow and red,	They gloweden bitwixen yelow and reed,
The circles of his eyes in his head,	The cercles of his eyen in his heed,
Black was his beard, and manly was his face;	Blak was his berd, and manly was his face;
Lycurgus himself, the great king of Thrace.	Lygurge hymself, the grete kyng of Trace.
There mayst thou seen, coming with Palamon,	Ther maistow seen, comynge with Palamoun,
Every one according to his preference.	Everych after his opinioun.
They were armed, as I have told you,	Armed were they, as I have yow told,
There is no new fashion that has not been old.	Ther is no newe gyse that it nas old.
And have an axe, and one a mace of steel --	And have an ax, and som a mace of steel --
And one of them will have a Prussian shield or a buckler;	And som wol have a Pruce sheeld or a targe;
And one of them will have a set of plate armor;	And som wol have a paire plates large;
And in a breastplate and a light tunic;	And in a brestplate and a light gypoun;
One of them will be armed in a coat of mail,	Som wol ben armed in an haubergeoun,
With him there went knights many a one;	With hym ther wenten knyghtes many on;
And right so fared those with Palamon.	And right so ferden they with Palamon.
It would be a pleasing sight to see.	It were a lusty sighte for to see.
To fight for a lady, bless me!	To fighte for a lady, benedicitee!
They would, willingly, desire to be there --	They wolde, hir thankes, wilnen to be there --
Who loves passionately and has his might,	That loveth paramours and hath his myght,
You know well that every vigorous knight	Ye knowen wel that every lusty knyght
For if there fell tomorrow such a situation,	For if ther fille tomorwe swich a cas,
And well it was for him who was chosen to be there,	And wel was hym that therto chosen was,
Has prayed that he might participate in that game;	Hath preyed that he myghte been of that game;
And would, willingly, have an outstanding reputation	And wolde, his thankes, han a passant name,
For every person that loved chivalry	For every wight that lovede chivalrye
Was not of so few so noble a company.	Nas of so fewe so noble a compaignye.
As far as God has made sea or land,	As fer as God hath maked see or lond,
That never, since the world began,	That nevere, sithen that the world bigan,
And surely many a man there believed	And sikerly ther trowed many a man
Well armed for the battle in all respects.	Wel armed for the werre at alle rightes.
Each one of them has brought a hundred knights,	Hath everich of hem broght an hundred knyghtes,
And to Athens, to keep their agreement,	And til Atthenes, hir covenant for to holde,
To decide the battle, as I told you.	The bataille to darreyne, as I yow tolde.
When each one should bring a hundred knights	That everich sholde an hundred knyghtes brynge
The day of their return approaches,	The day approcheth of hir retournynge,
And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.	And speke of Palamon and of Arcite.
When it was done, it greatly pleased him.	Whan it was doon, hym lyked wonder weel.
The temples and the theatre in all respects,	The temples and the theatre every deel,
Who at his great cost thus prepared	That at his grete cost arrayed thus
Now these lists are made, and Theseus,	Now been thise lystes maad, and Theseus,
With many a florin he bought the paints.	With many a floryn he the hewes boghte.
He who made it well knew how to paint in a life-like manner;	Wel koude he peynten lifly that it wroghte;
And said, "Help, for thou canst (do so) best of all!"	And seyde, "Help, for thou mayst best of alle!"
Very piteously did she call on Lucina	Ful pitously Lucyna gan she calle
But because her child was so long unborn,	But for hir child so longe was unborn,
Where Pluto has his dark region.	Ther Pluto hath his derke regioun.
She cast her eyes down full low	Hir eyen caste she ful lowe adoun
With bow in hand and arrows in a quiver.	With bowe in honde and arwes in a cas.
Her statue was clothed in yellowish green,	In gaude grene hir statue clothed was,
Waxing it was and should wane soon.	Wexynge it was and sholde wanye soone.
And underneath her feet she had a moon --	And undernethe hir feet she hadde a moone --
With small hounds all about her feet,	With smale houndes al aboute hir feet,
This goddess sat full high on a hart,	This goddesse on an hert ful hye seet,
The which I do not desire to call to mind.	The which me list nat drawen to memorie.
For which Diana wrought him care and woe.	For which Dyane wroghte hym care and wo.
And Meleager, and many more others,	And Meleagre, and many another mo,
How Atalanta hunted the wild boar,	How Atthalante hunted the wilde boor,
Yet was painted a little further on	Yet peynted was a litel forther moor
And devoured him, because they did not know him.	And freeten hym, for that they knewe hym naught.
I saw how his hounds have caught him	I saugh how that his houndes have hym caught
For vengeance that he saw Diana all naked;	For vengeaunce that he saugh Diane al naked;
There I saw Actaeon changed into a hart,	Ther saugh I Attheon an hert ymaked,
But Penneus' daughter, who is called Daphne.	But Penneus doghter, which that highte Dane.
There I saw Daphne, turned into a tree --	Ther saugh I Dane, yturned til a tree --
Her son is also a star, as one can see.	Hir sone is eek a sterre, as men may see.
Thus was it painted; I can tell you no more.	Thus was it peynted; I kan sey yow no ferre.
And after she was made the North Star	And after was she maad the loode-sterre.
Was turned from a woman into a bear,	Was turned from a womman til a bere,
When Diana was angry with her,	Whan that Diane agreved was with here,
There I saw how woeful Callisto,	Ther saugh I how woful Calistopee,
(With scenes) of hunting and of modest chastity.	Of huntyng and of shamefast chastitee.
The walls are painted all over	Depeynted been the walles up and doun
As briefly as I can, I will hasten myself,	As shortly as I kan, I wol me haste,
Now to the temple of Diana the chaste,	Now to the temple of Dyane the chaste,
In reverence of Mars and of his glory.	In redoutynge of Mars and of his glorie.
With subtle brush was depicted this story	With soutil pencel was depeynted this storie
With red eyes, and he ate of a man;	With eyen rede, and of a man he eet;
A wolf stood there before him at his feet	A wolf ther stood biforn hym at his feet
This god of arms was arrayed thus.	This god of armes was arrayed thus.
That one Puella, that other Rubeus --	That oon Puella, that oother Rubeus --
Of stars, that are called in books,	Of sterres, that been cleped in scriptures,
Armed, and looked as grim as if he were mad;	Armed, and looked grym as he were wood;
The statue of Mars stood upon a chariot	The statue of Mars upon a carte stood
I can not recount them all even if I desired to.	I may nat rekene hem alle though I wolde.
Suffices one illustrative tale in old histories;	Suffiseth oon ensample in stories olde;
Who shall be slain or else dead for love.	Who shal be slayn or elles deed for love.
As is depicted in the stars above	As is depeynted in the sterres above
So was it shown in that portraiture,	So was it shewed in that portreiture,
By menacing of Mars, according to the horoscope;	By manasynge of Mars, right by figure;
Yet was their death depicted before then	Yet was hir deth depeynted ther-biforn
Of great Nero, and of Antonius;	Of grete Nero, and of Antonius;
Depicted was the slaughter of Julius,	Depeynted was the slaughtre of Julius,
Hanging by a thin thread of twine.	Hangynge by a soutil twynes threed.
With the sharp sword over his head	With the sharpe swerd over his heed
I saw conquest, sitting in great honor,	Saugh I Conquest, sittynge in greet honour,
And all above, painted in a tower,	And al above, depeynted in a tour,
Who forges sharp swords on his anvil.	That forgeth sharpe swerdes on his styth.
The barber, and the butcher, and the smith,	The barbour, and the bocher, and the smyth,
There were also, of those influenced by Mars,	Ther were also, of Martes divisioun,
The wagon driver run over by his wagon --	The cartere overryden with his carte --
Nothing concerning the evil influence of Mars was forgotten.	Noght was foryeten by the infortune of Marte.
The cook scalded, despite his long-handled spoon.	The cook yscalded, for al his longe ladel.
The sow devouring the child right in the cradle;	The sowe freten the child right in the cradel;
The hunter killed by the wild bears;	The hunte strangled with the wilde beres;
Yet I saw burned the ships dancing (on the waves);	Yet saugh I brent the shippes hoppesteres;
The town destroyed, there was nothing left.	The toun destroyed, ther was no thyng laft.
The tyrant, with his prey taken by force;	The tiraunt, with the pray by force yraft;
A thousand slain, and not killed by the plague;	A thousand slayn, and nat of qualm ystorve;
Armed Discontent, Alarm, and fierce Violence;	Armed Compleint, Outhees, and fiers Outrage;
Yet I saw Madness, laughing in his rage,	Yet saugh I Woodnesse, laughynge in his rage,
With grief and sorry countenance.	With disconfort and sory contenaunce.
Amidst the temple sat Misfortune,	Amyddes of the temple sat Meschaunce,
The cold death, with mouth gaping upwards.	The colde deeth, with mouth gapyng upright.
The nail driven in the top of the head at night;	The nayl ydryven in the shode anyght;
His heart-blood has bathed all his hair --	His herte-blood hath bathed al his heer --
There yet I saw slayer of himself there --	The sleere of hymself yet saugh I ther --
All full of creaking was that sorry place.	Al ful of chirkyng was that sory place.
The open war, all covered with blood from wounds:	The open werre, with woundes al bibledde;
The treason of the murdering in the bed;	The tresoun of the mordrynge in the bedde;
The stable burning with the black smoke;	The shepne brennynge with the blake smoke;
The smiler with the knife under the cloak;	The smylere with the knyf under the cloke;
The pick-purse, and also the pale Fear;	The pykepurs, and eek the pale Drede;
The cruel Anger, red as any glowing coal;	The crueel Ire, reed as any gleede;
Of Felony, and all the scheming;	Of Felonye, and al the compassyng;
There I saw first the malicious plotting	Ther saugh I first the derke ymaginyng
Was big as a large barrel, (made) of iron bright and shining.	Was tonne-greet, of iren bright and shene.
With tough iron; and to make it strong,	With iren tough; and for to make it strong,
Bound crosswise and lengthwise	Yclenched overthwart and endelong
The door was all of eternal adamant (hardest of stones),	The dore was al of adamant eterne,
Through which men might discern any light.	Thurgh which men myghten any light discerne.
For there was no window on the wall,	For wyndowe on the wal ne was ther noon,
The northern light shone in at the doors,	The northren lyght in at the dores shoon,
That it made all the gate to shake.	That it made al the gate for to rese.
And out of there came a rush of wind and such a blast	And therout came a rage and swich a veze
Was long and narrow, and frightening to look upon.	Was long and streit, and gastly for to se.
There stood the temple of Mars, powerful in arms,	Ther stood the temple of Mars armypotente,
And downward from a hill, close to a grassy slope,	And dounward from an hille, under a bente,
As though a storm should burst every bough.	As though a storm sholde bresten every bough.
Through which there ran a rumbling in a moaning of wind,	In which ther ran a rumbel in a swough,
Of stumps sharp and hideous to behold,	Of stubbes sharpe and hidouse to biholde,
With knotty, gnarled, barren old trees,	With knotty, knarry, bareyne trees olde,
In which there dwells neither man nor beast,	In which ther dwelleth neither man ne best,
First a forest was painted on the wall,	First on the wal was peynted a forest,
Where Mars has his most excellent mansion.	Ther as Mars hath his sovereyn mansioun.
That is called the Great Temple of Mars in Thrace,	That highte the grete temple of Mars in Trace,
Like to the interior of the grisly place	Lyk to the estres of the grisly place
All painted was the wall, in length and breadth,	Al peynted was the wal, in lengthe and brede,
Within the temple of mighty Mars the red?	Withinne the temple of myghty Mars the rede?
The portraiture that was upon the wall	The portreiture that was upon the wal
Why should I not as well also tell you all	Why sholde I noght as wel eek telle yow al
He carried a bow and arrows bright and keen.	A bowe he bar and arwes brighte and kene.
And he was blind, as it is often seen;	And blynd he was, as it is often seene;
He had two wings upon his shoulders,	Upon his shuldres wynges hadde he two,
Above her head her doves fluttering.	Above hir heed hir dowves flikerynge.
A rose garland, fresh and fragrant;	A rose gerland, fressh and wel smellynge;
And on her head, very elegant to look upon,	And on hir heed, ful semely for to se,
She had a citole (zither-like instrument) in her right hand,	A citole in hir right hand hadde she,
With waves green and bright as any glass.	With wawes grene, and brighte as any glas.
And from the navel down all was covered	And fro the navele doun al covered was
Was naked, floating in the large sea,	Was naked, fletynge in the large see,
The statue of Venus, glorious to look upon,	The statue of Venus, glorious for to se,
Even though I could recount a thousand more.	And though I koude rekene a thousand mo.
Until for woe they very often said "alas!"	Til they for wo ful ofte seyde "allas!"
Lo, all these folk were so caught in her snare,	Lo, alle thise folk so caught were in hir las,
For she may rule the world as she pleases.	For as hir list the world than may she gye.
Can not share power with Venus,	Ne may with Venus holde champartie,
Beauty nor trickery, strength nor bravery,	Beautee ne sleighte, strengthe ne hardynesse,
Thus can you see that wisdom nor riches,	Thus may ye seen that wysdom ne richesse,
The riche Cresus, wretched in servitude.	The riche Cresus, kaytyf in servage.
Nor of Turnus, with the hardy fierce courage,	Ne of Turnus, with the hardy fiers corage,
The enchantments of Medea and Circes --	Th'enchauntementz of Medea and Circes --
Nor yet the folly of king Solomon,	Ne yet the folye of kyng Salomon,
Nor the handsome Narcissus of many years ago,	Ne Narcisus the faire of yore agon,
The porter, Idleness, was not forgotten	Nat was foryeten the porter, Ydelnesse,
With all the garden (of Love) and the pleasure.	With al the gardyn and the lustynesse.
Was shown on the wall in portraits,	Was shewed on the wal in portreyynge,
Where Venus has her principal dwelling,	Ther Venus hath hir principal dwellynge,
For truly all the mount of Cithaeron,	For soothly al the mount of Citheroun,
And more than I can make mention of.	And mo than I kan make of mencioun.
Were painted in sequence on the wall,	By ordre weren peynted on the wal,
Desire and festivity, and all the details	Lust and array, and alle the circumstaunces
Feasts, musical instruments, dance-songs, dances,	Festes, instrumentz, caroles, daunces,
And a cuckoo sitting on her hand;	And a cokkow sittynge on hir hand;
Who wore a garland of yellow marigolds,	That wered of yelewe gooldes a gerland,
Expenditures, Attentiveness, and Jealousy,	Despense, Bisynesse, and Jalousye,
Charms and Force, Lies, Flattery,	Charmes and Force, Lesynges, Flaterye,
Beauty and Youth, Mirth, Riches,	Beautee and Youthe, Bauderie, Richesse,
Pleasure and Hope, Desire, Foolhardiness,	Pleasance and Hope, Desir, Foolhardynesse,
The oaths that assure their covenants;	The othes that hir covenantz assuren;
The fiery strokes of the desiring	The firy strokes of the desirynge
The sacred tears, and the lamenting,	The sacred teeris, and the waymentynge,
The broken sleeps, and the cold sighs,	The broken slepes, and the sikes colde,
Wrought on the wall, full piteous to behold,	Wroght on the wal, ful pitous to biholde,
First in the temple of Venus canst thou see	First in the temple of Venus maystow se
That were in these three chapels.	That weren in thise oratories thre.
The shape, the appearance, and the figures	The shap, the contenaunce, and the figures
The noble sculpture and the portraits,	The noble kervyng and the portreitures,
But yet had I forgotten to describe	But yet hadde I foryeten to devyse
In worship of Diana of chastity,	In worshipe of Dyane of chastitee,
A chapel, rich to look upon,	An oratorie, riche for to see,
Of white alabaster and red coral,	Of alabastre whit and reed coral,
And northward, in a turret on the wall,	And northward, in a touret on the wal,
That cost fully a cartload of gold.	That coste largely of gold a fother.
Of Mars, he has made just such another,	Of Mars, he maked hath right swich another,
And on the westward gate, in memory	And on the gate westward, in memorie
Had made an altar and a chapel;	Doon make an auter and an oratorie;
In worship of Venus, goddess of love,	In worshipe of Venus, goddesse of love,
And to do his rite and sacrifice,	And for to doon his ryte and sacrifise,
To make and devise the theatre.	The theatre for to maken and devyse.
That Theseus did not give him food and wages	That Theseus ne yaf him mete and wages
Nor painter, nor carver of images,	Ne portreyour, ne kervere of ymages,
Who knows geometry or arithmetic,	That geometrie or ars-metrike kan,
For in the land there was no skilled man	For in the lond ther was no crafty man
Was none in earth, (constructed) in so little time;	Was noon in erthe, as in so litel space;
And shortly to conclude, such a place	And shortly to concluden, swich a place
Westward just such another on the opposite (side).	Westward right swich another in the opposit.
He did not hinder his fellow from seeing.	He letted nat his felawe for to see.
That when a man was set on one tier of seats,	That whan a man was set on o degree,
Full of tiers of seats, the height of sixty paces,	Ful of degrees, the heighte of sixty pas,
Round was the shape, in the manner of a circle,	Round was the shap, in manere of compas,
Walled with stone, and surrounded by a ditch.	Walled of stoon, and dyched al withoute.
The circumference was a mile around,	The circuit a myle was aboute,
I dare well say there was not (another such) in this world.	I dar wel seyen in this world ther nas.
That such a noble theatre as it was	That swich a noble theatre as it was
To build the lists royally,	To maken up the lystes roially,
If I forget to tell the expenditure	If I foryete to tellen the dispence
I suppose men would consider it negligence	I trowe men wolde deme it necligence
To Thebes with his old wide walls.	To Thebes with his olde walles wyde.
They take their leave, and homeward did they ride	They taken hir leve, and homward gonne they ride
And thus with good hope and with happy heart	And thus with good hope and with herte blithe
And especially the Thebans many times.	And namely the Thebans often sithe.
And thanked him with all their heart and might,	And thonked hym with al hir herte and myght,
But down on knees went every sort of person,	But doun on knees wente every maner wight,
When Theseus has behaved so graciously?	Whan Theseus hath doon so fair a grace?
Who could tell, or who could describe in writing,	Who kouthe telle, or who kouthe it endite,
Who springs up for joy but Arcite?	Who spryngeth up for joye but Arcite?
Who but Palamon looks happy now?	Who looketh lightly now but Palamoun?
This is your (destined) end and your conclusion."	This is youre ende and youre conclusioun."
Say your opinion, and consider yourself satisfied.	Seyeth youre avys, and holdeth you apayd.
And if it seems to you that this is well said,	And if yow thynketh this is weel ysayd,
(Save this:) that one of you must be dead or taken.	That oon of yow ne shal be deed or taken.
You shall make no other agreement with me,	Ye shul noon oother ende with me maken,
I shall be an impartial and true judge.	As I shal evene juge been and trewe.
I shall make the lists in this place,	The lystes shal I maken in this place,
To whom Fortune gives so good a gift (to win the battle).	To whom that Fortune yeveth so fair a grace.
Then I shall give Emelye as wife	Thanne shal I yeve Emelya to wyve
Slay his opponent, or drive him out of the lists ,	Sleen his contrarie, or out of lystes dryve,
Can with his hundred, as I spoke of now,	May with his hundred, as I spak of now,
This is to say, that whether he or thou	This is to seyn, that wheither he or thow
That whichever of you both who has the power --	That wheither of yow bothe that hath myght --
Upon my word, and as I am a knight,	Upon my trouthe, and as I am a knyght,
And this I promise you without fail,	And this bihote I yow withouten faille,
Armed up for the lists in all respects,	Armed for lystes up at alle rightes,
Each one of you shall bring a hundred knights	Everich of you shal brynge an hundred knyghtes
And fifty weeks from this day, more or less,	And this day fifty wykes, fer ne ner,
Freely, without ransom or resistance,	Frely, withouten raunson or daunger,
That each one of you shall go where he pleases	That everich of you shal goon where hym leste
If this pleases you, take it for the best:	If that you liketh, take it for the beste:
Without any arguing --	Withouten any repplicacioun --
My will is this, for flat conclusion,	My wyl is this, for plat conclusioun,
Lo, hear what I shall arrange for your fate.	Lo, heere youre ende of that I shal devyse.
That each of you shall have his destiny	That ech of yow shal have his destynee
And therefore I put you in this situation,	And forthy I yow putte in this degree,
Although you be never so jealous nor so angry.	Al be ye never so jalouse ne so wrothe.
This is to say, she can not now have both,	This is to seyn, she may nat now han bothe,
He must go whistle in an ivy leaf;	He moot go pipen in an yvy leef;
That one of you, whether he likes it or not,	That oon of you, al be hym looth or lief,
At once, though you were to fight for evermore,	Atones, though ye fighten everemo,
You know yourself she can not wed two	Ye woot yourself she may nat wedden two
For whom you have this strife and jealousy --	For whom ye have this strif and jalousye --
To wed when it is time; but none the less --	To wedden whan tyme is; but nathelees --
Each of you both is worthy, doubtless,	Ech of you bothe is worthy, doutelees,
Though she were a queen or a princess,	Though that she were a queene or a princesse,
"To speak of royal lineage and riches,	"To speke of roial lynage and richesse,
And he grants them his favor, and thus he said:	And he hem graunteth grace, and thus he seyde:
And prayed him to be their lord and to have mercy ,	And hym of lordshipe and of mercy preyde,
And they fairly and well swore to him (to do) his request,	And they hym sworen his axyng faire and weel,
I forgive you this trespass completely."	I yow foryeve this trespas every deel."
But be my friends in all that you can.	But been my freendes in all that ye may.
That you shall never more harm my country,	That nevere mo ye shal my contree dere,
And you must both immediately swear unto me	And ye shul bothe anon unto me swere
And also of Emelye, my dear sister.	And eek of Emelye, my suster deere.
At the request of the queen, who kneels here,	At requeste of the queene, that kneleth heere,
I wholly forgive you this trespass,	I yow foryeve al hoolly this trespaas,
As one who has been often caught in its snare,	As he that hath ben caught ofte in his laas,
And know how sorely it can afflict a man,	And woot hou soore it kan a man distreyne,
And therefore, since I know of love's pain	And therfore, syn I knowe of loves peyne
For in my time I was a servant (of love).	For in my tyme a servant was I oon.
A man must be a fool, either young or old --	A man moot ben a fool, or yong or oold --
But all must be tried, hot or cold;	But all moot ben assayed, hoot and coold;
By God, than knows a cuckoo or a hare!	By God, than woot a cokkow or an hare!
She knows no more of all this passionate business,	She woot namoore of al this hoote fare,
Owes them as much gratitude for this as she owes me.	Kan hem therfore as muche thank as me.
That she for whom they have this sport	That she for whom they han this jolitee
But this is yet the best joke of all,	But this is yet the beste game of alle,
Those who serve love, whatever may happen.	That serven love, for aught that may bifalle.
And yet they consider themselves very wise,	And yet they wenen for to been ful wyse
Thus has their lord, the god of love, paid	Thus hath hir lord, the god of love, ypayed
See how they bleed! Are they not in fine condition?	Se how they blede! Be they noght wel arrayed?
Behold, for the sake of God who sits above,	Bihoold, for Goddes sake that sit above,
Who can be a fool unless he is in love?	Who may been a fool but if he love?
Now look, is that not a great folly?	Now looketh, is nat that an heigh folye?
Brought them both hither to die.	Broght hem hyder bothe for to dye.
And yet has Love, despite anything they could do,	And yet hath love, maugree hir eyen two,
And that their death lies in my power also,	And that hir deth lith in my myght also,
And know I am their mortal enemy,	And witen I am hir mortal enemy,
Who freely were out of my prison,	That quitly weren out of my prisoun,
Lo here this Arcite and this Palamon,	Lo heere this Arcite and this Palamoun,
Of every heart whatever he wants to devise.	Of everich herte as that hym list divyse.
For he can make, as he pleases,	For he kan maken, at his owene gyse,
He may be called a god for his miracles,	He may be cleped a god for his myracles,
Against his power there avail no obstacles.	Ayeyns his myght ther gayneth none obstacles.
How mighty and how great a lord is he!	How myghty and how greet a lord is he!
"The god of love, ah, bless my soul!	"The god of love, a benedicite!
And spoke these same words all aloud:	And spak thise same wordes al on highte:
And shortly, when his anger is thus gone,	And shortly, whan his ire is thus agoon,
But considers pride and humility equal."	But weyeth pride and humblesse after oon."
That in such cases knows no distinctions	That in swich cas kan no divisioun
That lord has little sound judgment,	That lord hath litel of discrecioun,
Who will persist in what he first began.	That wol mayntene that he first bigan.
As well as to a proud, spiteful man	As wel as to a proud despitous man
To those who are in repentance and fear,	To hem that been in repentaunce and drede,
But be a lion, both in word and deed,	But been a leon, bothe in word and dede,
Upon a lord that will have no mercy,	Upon a lord that wol have no mercy,
And in his gentle heart he thought straightway,	And in his gentil herte he thoughte anon,
Of women, for they weep continually,	Of wommen, for they wepen evere in oon,
And also his heart had compassion	And eek his herte hadde compassioun
And also deliver himself out of prison.	And eek delivere hymself out of prisoun.
Will help himself in love, if he can,	Wol helpe hymself in love, if that he kan,
As thus: he thought well that every man	As thus: he thoghte wel that every man
Yet in his reason he excused them both,	Yet in his resoun he hem bothe excused,
And although his anger reproached them for their guilt,	And although that his ire hir gilt accused,
The trespass of them both, and also the cause,	The trespas of hem bothe, and eek the cause,
And though he first for anger shook and trembled,	And though he first for ire quook and sterte,
For pity comes soon to a gentle heart.	For pitee renneth soone in gentil herte.
Until at the last his mood was calmed,	Til at the laste aslaked was his mood,
And would have kissed his feet there where he stood;	And wolde have kist his feet ther as he stood;
And they fall down on their bare knees	And on hir bare knees adoun they falle
"Have mercy, Lord, upon all of us women!"	"Have mercy, Lord, upon us wommen alle!"
And all cried, both low ranking and high,	And alle crieden, bothe lasse and moore,
And saw their bloody wounds wide and sore,	And saugh hir blody woundes wyde and soore,
And this debate was for nothing but love;	And no thyng but for love was this debaat;
That ever such a misfortune should occur,	That evere swich a chaunce sholde falle,
Great pity was it, as it seemed to them all,	Greet pitee was it, as it thoughte hem alle,
And all the ladies in the company.	And alle the ladyes in the compaignye.
Began to weep, and so did Emelye,	Gan for to wepe, and so dide Emelye,
The queen at once, for true womanliness,	The queene anon, for verray wommanhede,
You shall be dead, by mighty Mars the red!"	Ye shal be deed, by myghty Mars the rede!"
There is no deed to torture you with the cord.	It nedeth noght to pyne yow with the corde.
Has condemned you, and I will pronounce it;	Hath dampned yow, and I wol it recorde;
Your own mouth, by your confession,	Youre owene mouth, by youre confessioun,
This worthy duke answered at once in reply,	This worthy duc answerde anon agayn,
For we have both deserved to be slain."	For bothe han we deserved to be slayn."
But slay my fellow in the same way,	But sle my felawe in the same wise,
Therefore I ask death and my judicial sentence;	Wherfore I axe deeth and my juwise;
That I will die at this moment in her sight.	That I wol dye present in hir sighte.
Who loves the beautiful Emelye so passionately	That loveth so hoote Emelye the brighte
I am thy mortal foe, and it is I	I am thy mortal foo, and it am I
That wickedly has broken (out of) thy prison.	That hath thy prisoun broken wikkedly.
That I am that same woeful Palamon	That I am thilke woful Palamoun
For since the day is come that I must dye,	For sith the day is come that I shal dye,
And this is he that loves Emelye.	And this is he that loveth Emelye.
And thou hast made him thy chief squire;	And thou hast maked hym thy chief squier;
Thus has he tricked thee for many years,	Thus hath he japed thee ful many a yer,
And said that he was called Philostrate.	And seyde that he highte Philostrate.
For this is he that came unto thy gate	For this is he that cam unto thy gate
For which he has deserved to be dead.	For which he hath deserved to be deed.
Who is banished from thy land on (pain of losing) his head,	That fro thy lond is banysshed on his heed,
This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,	This is thy mortal foo, this is Arcite,
But slay my fellow also as well as me;	But sle my felawe eek as wel as me;
But slay me first, by holy charity!	But sle me first, for seinte charitee!
Give us neither mercy nor refuge,	Ne yif us neither mercy ne refuge,
And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,	And as thou art a rightful lord and juge,
Who are burdened down by our own lives;	That been encombred of oure owene lyves;
Two woeful wretches are we, two miserable people,	Two woful wrecches been we, two caytyves,
We have deserved the death, both of us two.	We have the deeth disserved bothe two.
And said, "Sire, what more words are needed?	And seyde, "Sire, what nedeth wordes mo?
This Palamon answered hastily	This Palamon answerde hastily
Without judge or other officer,	Withouten juge or oother officere,
Who are so bold as to fight here	That been so hardy for to fighten heere
But tell me what sort of men you are,	But telleth me what myster men ye been,
Who smites any stroke that I can see.	That smyteth any strook that I may seen.
By mighty Mars, he shall at once be dead	By myghty Mars, he shal anon be deed
No more, on the penalty of the loss of your head!	Namoore, up peyne of lesynge of youre heed!
And pulled out a sword and cried, "Stop!	And pulled out a swerd and cride, "Hoo!
And with a sudden leap he was between them two,	And at a stert he was bitwix hem two,
This duke smote his warhorse with his spurs,	This duc his courser with his spores smoot,
It seemed as if it would fell an oak.	It semed as it wolde felle an ook.
So hideously that with the weakest stroke	So hidously that with the leeste strook
The bright swords went to and fro	The brighte swerdes wenten to and fro
Who fought as fiercely as if it were two wild boars.	That foughten breme as it were bores two.
He was aware of Arcite and Palamon,	He was war of Arcite and Palamon,
He looks toward the sun, and immediately	Under the sonne he looketh, and anon
And when this duke was come unto the glade,	And whan this duc was come unto the launde,
With such hounds as he pleases to command.	With houndes swiche as that hym list comaunde.
This duke will have a run or two at him	This duc wol han a cours at hym or tweye
For through there the hart was accustomed to take his escape,	For thider was the hert wont have his flight,
And directly to the glade he rides,	And to the launde he rideth hym ful right,
Duke Theseus has held the straight way.	Duc Theseus the streighte wey hath holde.
In which there was a hart, so people told him,	In which ther was an hert, as men hym tolde,
And to the grove that stood very close by,	And to the grove that stood ful faste by,
On hunting they are ridden royally.	On huntyng be they riden roially.
And Emelye, clothed all in green,	And Emelye, clothed al in grene,
With his Ypolita, the faire queen,	With his Ypolita, the faire queene,
And Theseus with all joy and bliss,	And Theseus with alle joye and blis,
For next to Mars he now serves Diana.	For after Mars he serveth now Dyane.
To be himself the large hart's slayer,	To been hymself the grete hertes bane,
That it is all his joy and desire	That it is al his joye and appetit
For in his hunting he has such delight	For in his huntyng hath he swich delit
With huntsman and horn and hounds beside him.	With hunte and horn and houndes hym bisyde.
That he is not clad, and ready to ride	That he nys clad, and redy for to ryde
That in his bed there dawns for him no day	That in his bed ther daweth hym no day
And especially at the large hart in May,	And namely at the grete hert in May,
Who is so desirous to hunt,	That for to hunten is so desirus,
All this is ruled by the foresight above.	Al is this reuled by the sighte above.
Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,	Be it of werre, or pees, or hate, or love,
For certainly, our desires here,	For certeinly, oure appetites heer,
That happens not again in a thousand years.	That falleth nat eft withinne a thousand yeer.
Yet sometimes it shall happen on one day	Yet somtyme it shal fallen on a day
The contrary of a thing by yes or no,	The contrarie of a thyng by ye or nay,
So strong it is that, though the world had sworn	So strong it is that, though the world had sworn
The providence that God has foreseen,	The purveiaunce that God hath seyn biforn,
That executes in the world everywhere	That executeth in the world over al
And forth I will tell you of Theseus.	And forth I wole of Theseus yow telle.
And in this manner I leave them to remain fighting,	And in this wise I lete hem fightyng dwelle,
They fought up to the ankle in their blood.	Up to the ancle foghte they in hir blood.
That froth at the mouth white as foam for mad anger.	That frothen whit as foom for ire wood.
They began to smite like wild boars,	As wilde bores gonne they to smyte,
And Arcite was like a cruel tiger;	And as a crueel tigre was Arcite;
In his fighting was a mad lion,	In his fightyng were a wood leon,
Thou mightest suppose that this Palamon	Thou myghtest wene that this Palamon
They thrust at each other a wonderfully long time.	They foynen ech at oother wonder longe.
As friendly as if he were his own brother;	As freendly as he were his owene brother;
Each one of them helped to arm the other	Everich of hem heelp for to armen oother
But straightway, without word or conversing,	But streight, withouten word or rehersyng,
There was no 'good day,' nor no salutations,	Ther nas no good day, ne no saluyng,
When each of them knew the other.	As fer as everich of hem oother knewe.
So fared they in changing colors of their faces,	So ferden they in chaungyng of hir hewe,
Or he must slay me, if I suffer misfortune."	Or he moot sleen me, if that me myshappe."
For either I must slay him at the gap,	For outher I moot sleen hym at the gappe,
Without fail, he must be dead, or I,	Withoute faille, he moot be deed, or I,
And breaks both boughs and the leaves,	And breketh bothe bowes and the leves,
And hears him come rushing in the bushes,	And hereth hym come russhyng in the greves,
When the lion or the bear is hunted,	Whan hunted is the leon or the bere,
He who stands at the gap in the forrest with a spear,	That stondeth at the gappe with a spere,
Just as the hunters in the reign of Thrace,	Right as the hunters in the regne of Trace,
The color in their faces began to change;	To chaungen gan the colour in hir face;
This Arcite and this Palamon are met.	This Arcite and this Palamon ben met.
And in the grove, at time and place set,	And in the grove, at tyme and place yset,
He carries all the armor before him.	He carieth al the harneys hym biforn.
The battle in the field between them two;	The bataille in the feeld bitwix hem tweyne;
Both sufficient and suitable to decide	Bothe suffisaunt and mete to darreyne
Very secretly he has prepared two sets of armor,	Ful prively two harneys hath he dight,
And on the morning, before it was day's light,	And on the morwe, er it were dayes light,
Arcite has ridden immediately into the town,	Arcite is riden anon unto the toun,
Arcite and Palamon well find that (to be true).	Wel fynden that Arcite and Palamoun.
Will not, willingly, have any partnership.	Wol noght, his thankes, have no felaweshipe.
Full truly it is said that love nor lordship	Ful sooth is seyd that love ne lordshipe
O reign, that will have no partner with thee!	O regne, that wolt no felawe have with thee!
When each of them had laid his faith as a pledge.	Whan ech of hem had leyd his feith to borwe.
And thus they are departed until morning,	And thus they been departed til amorwe,
This Palamon answered, "I agree."	This Palamon answerde, "I graunte it thee."
Thou mayest well have thy lady as far as I am concerned."	Thow mayst wel have thy lady as for me."
And slay me in this wood where I am in,	And sle me in this wode ther I am inne,
And if it so be that thou win my lady,	And if so be that thou my lady wynne,
Enough for thee, and bed-clothes for thy bedding.	Ynough for thee, and clothes for thy beddynge.
And food and drink this night will I bring	And mete and drynke this nyght wol I brynge
And choose the best, and leave the worst for me.	And ches the beste, and leef the worste for me.
But here I will be found as a knight,	That heere I wol be founden as a knyght,
Without the knowledge of any other person,	Withoute wityng of any oother wight,
Have here my pledge; tomorrow I will not fail,	Have heer my trouthe; tomorwe I wol nat faille,
And desire to decide the right to her by battle,	And wilnest to darreyne hire by bataille,
But for as much as thou art a worthy knight	But for as muche thou art a worthy knyght
And I will love her in spite of all thy might!	And I wol love hire maugree al thy myght!
Lo! True fool, think well that love is free,	What! Verray fool, thynk wel that love is free,
Which thou sayest that I have made to thee.	Which that thou seist that I have maad to thee.
For I repudiate the pledge and the bond	For I defye the seurete and the bond
Thou shouldest never walk out of this grove,	Thou sholdest nevere out of this grove pace,
And also because thou hast no weapon in this place,	And eek that thow no wepne hast in this place,
Were it not that thou art sick and mad for love,	Nere it that thou art sik and wood for love,
And said thus: "By God who sits above,	And seyde thus: "By God that sit above,
As fierce as a lion pulled out his sword,	As fiers as leon pulled out his swerd,
When he knew him, and had heard his tale,	Whan he hym knew, and hadde his tale herd,
This Arcite, with full spiteful heart,	This Arcite, with ful despitous herte,
Choose which thou wish, or thou shalt not escape!"	Chees which thou wolt, or thou shalt nat asterte!"
Either thou shalt not love Emelye,	Or thow ne shalt nat loven Emelye.
But out of prison am escaped by good luck,	But out of prison am astert by grace,
And though I have no weapon in this place,	And though that I no wepene have in this place,
For I am Palamon, thy mortal foe.	For I am Palamon, thy mortal foo.
But I will love her only and no other;	But I wol love hire oonly and namo;
Thou shalt not love my lady Emelye,	Thou shalt nat love my lady Emelye,
I will be dead, or else thou shalt die.	I wol be deed, or elles thou shalt dye.
And thus hast falsely changed thy name!	And falsly chaunged hast thy name thus!
And hast tricked here duke Theseus,	And hast byjaped heere duc Theseus,
As I full often have told thee before now,	As I ful ofte have told thee heerbiforn,
For whom that I have all this pain and woe,	For whom that I have al this peyne and wo,
Now art thou taken, who lovest my lady so,	Now artow hent, that lovest my lady so,
And said: "Arcite, false, wicked traitor,	And seide: "Arcite, false traytour wikke,
He leaped up out of the thick bushes	He stirte hym up out of the buskes thikke
As if he were mad, with face dead and pale,	As he were wood, with face deed and pale,
And when he had heard Arcite's tale,	And whan that he had herd Arcites tale,
For anger he trembled; no longer would he wait.	For ire he quook; no lenger wolde he byde.
He felt a cold sword suddenly glide,	He felte a coold swerd sodeynliche glyde,
This Palamon, that thought that through his heart	This Palamoun, that thoughte that thurgh his herte
And with that word he fell down in a trance	And with that word he fil doun in a traunce
Provided that I could do anything to please you."	So that I koude doon aught to youre plesaunce."
I do not reckon at the value of a weed,	Ne sette I nat the montance of a tare,
Of all the rest of my other troubles	Of al the remenant of myn oother care
You are the cause by which I die.	Ye been the cause wherfore that I dye.
You slay me with your eyes, Emelye!	Ye sleen me with youre eyen, Emelye!
That my death was destined before my first garment was made.	That shapen was my deeth erst than my sherte.
Stabbed through my faithful, sorrowful heart	Ystiked thurgh my trewe, careful herte
Love has his fiery dart so ardently	Love hath his firy dart so brennyngly
Whom Theseus torments in prison.	That Theseus martireth in prisoun.
Save only me and wretched Palamon,	Save oonly me and wrecched Palamoun,
Thus has your anger destroyed all our lineage,	Thus hath youre ire oure lynage al fordo,
Alas, thou fierce Mars! Alas, Juno!	Allas, thou felle Mars! Allas, Juno!
Now I am called Philostrate, not worth a penny.	Now highte I Philostrate, noght worth a myte.
But whereas I was accustomed to be called Arcite,	But ther as I was wont to highte Arcite,
For I dare not acknowledge my own name;	For I dar noght biknowe myn owene name;
And yet Juno does me much more shame,	And yet dooth Juno me wel moore shame,
I meekly serve him as his squire.	I serve hym as his squier povrely.
And now I am so wretched and so enslaved,	And now I am so caytyf and so thral,
By true lineage, of the royal family,	By verray ligne, as of the stok roial,
I am of his lineage and his offspring	Of his lynage am I and his ofspryng
And first was crowned king of the city.	And of the citee first was crouned kyng.
Who built Thebes, before the town first began,	That Thebes bulte, or first the toun bigan,
Of Cadmus, who was the first man	Of Cadmus, which that was the firste man
The royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion --	The blood roial of Cadme and Amphioun --
Alas, to ruin is brought	Allas, ybroght is to confusioun
Wilt thou make war on the city of Thebes?	Woltow werreyen Thebes the citee?
"Alas," he said, "that day that I was born!	"Allas," quod he, "that day that I was bore!
And sat himself down without any more.	And sette hym doun withouten any moore.
When Arcite had sung, he began to sigh	Whan that Arcite had songe, he gan to sike
Friday is seldom like all the rest of the week.	Selde is the Friday al the wowke ylike.
Is changeable, just so she changes her array.	Is gereful, right so chaungeth she array.
The hearts of her folk; just as her day	The hertes of hir folk; right as hir day
Just so can fickle Venus sadden	Right so kan geery Venus overcaste
Now it shines, now it rains hard,	Now it shyneth, now it reyneth faste,
Exactly like the Friday, truly for to tell,	Right as the Friday, soothly for to telle,
Now in the tree top, now down in the briars,	Now in the crope, now doun in the breres,
As these lovers do in their strange manners,	As doon thise loveres in hir queynte geres,
He fell suddenly into a state of anxiety,	Into a studie he fil sodeynly,
And sung all the rondel cheerfully,	And songen al the roundel lustily,
When Arcite had roamed all his fill,	Whan that Arcite hadde romed al his fille,
For in the thicket he sits now very still.	For in the bussh he sitteth now ful stille.
Who was near enough to hear all his speech,	That was so ny to herknen al his sawe,
Arcite knows full little of his fellow,	Ful litel woot Arcite of his felawe,
For every day people meet at unexpected times.	For al day meeteth men at unset stevene.
That "field has eyes and the wood has ears."	That "feeld hath eyen and the wode hath eres."
But truly it is said, since many years ago,	But sooth is seyd, go sithen many yeres,
God knows he would scarcely have believed it	God woot he wolde have trowed it ful lite.
In no way did he know that it was Arcite;	No thyng ne knew he that it was Arcite;
For he was sorely afraid of his death.	For soore afered of his deeth was he.
Was in a thicket, so that no man could see him,	Was in a bussh, that no man myghte hym se,
Where by chance this Palamon	Ther as by aventure this Palamoun
And in a path he roams up and down,	And in a path he rometh up and doun,
He rushed into the grove hastily,	Into the grove ful hastily he sterte,
In hope that I can get something green."	In hope that I som grene gete may."
Welcome be thou, fair, fresh May,	Welcome be thou, faire, fresshe May,
"May, with all thy flowers and thy greenery,	"May, with alle thy floures and thy grene,
And loud he sang in the bright sun:	And loude he song ayeyn the sonne shene:
Were it of woodbine or hawthorn leaves,	Were it of wodebynde or hawethorn leves,
To make himself a garland of the branches,	To maken hym a gerland of the greves,
By chance he began to hold his way	By aventure his wey he gan to holde
And to the grove of which I told you	And to the grove of which that I yow tolde
Out of the court, about a mile or two.	Out of the court, were it a myle or tweye.
He on a war horse, leaping about like the fire,	He on a courser, startlynge as the fir,
Meditating on the object of his desire,	Remembrynge on the poynt of his desir,
And to do his observance to May,	And for to doon his observaunce to May,
Is risen and looks on the merry day.	Is risen and looketh on the myrie day.
With Theseus is chief squire,	With Theseus is principal squier,
And Arcite, who in the royal court	And Arcita, that in the court roial
The silver drops hanging on the leaves.	The silver dropes hangynge on the leves.
And with his rays dries in the groves	And with his stremes dryeth in the greves
That all the orient laughs because of the light,	That al the orient laugheth of the light,
Salutes the morning gray in her song,	Salueth in hir song the morwe gray,
The busy lark, messenger of day,	The bisy larke, messager of day,
To which Fortune had brought him in the snare.	Til that Fortune had broght him in the snare.
That little knew how near his trouble was,	That litel wiste how ny that was his care,
Now I will turn again to Arcite,	Now wol I turne to Arcite ageyn,
This is the purpose and his full intent.	This is th'effect and his entente pleyn.
Or win Emelye to be his wife.	Or wynnen Emelye unto his wyf.
And shortly, he would either lose his life	And shortly, outher he wolde lese his lif
To help him to wage war on Theseus;	On Theseus to helpe him to werreye;
And in the night then he would take his way	And in the nyght thanne wolde he take his way
That in that grove he would hide himself all day,	That in that grove he wolde hym hyde al day,
For, shortly, this was his idea:	For, shortly, this was his opinion:
With fearful foot then stalks Palamon.	With dredeful foot thanne stalketh Palamon.
And to a grove close by	And til a grove faste ther bisyde
So that by necessity he must hide himself,	That nedes cost he moot hymselven hyde,
The night was short and very close to the day	The nyght was short and faste by the day
And thus he flees as fast as ever he can.	And thus he fleeth as faste as evere he may.
The jailer slept; he could not awake.	The gayler sleep; he myghte nat awake.
With narcotics and pure opium of Thebes,	With nercotikes and opie of Thebes fyn,
Of a spiced and sweetened drink made of a certain wine,	Of a clarree maad of a certeyn wyn,
For he had so given his jailer drink	For he hadde yeve his gayler drynke so
And flees the city as fast as he can go.	And fleeth the citee faste as he may go.
With the help of a friend, broke out of his prison	By helpyng of a freend, brak his prisoun
That soon after midnight Palamon,	That soone after the mydnyght Palamoun,
As, when a thing is pre-ordained, it must be --	As, whan a thyng is shapen, it shal be --
Whether it was by chance or fate --	Were it by aventure or destynee --
That tell all this story more fully),	That al this storie tellen moore pleyn),
It happened that in the seventh year, of May	It fel that in the seventhe yer, of May
Therefore I pass on as quickly as I can.	Therfore I passe as lightly as I may.
His martyrdom? In truth it is not I;	His martirdom? For sothe it am nat I;
Who could rime in English properly	Who koude ryme in Englyssh proprely
Perpetually, not just for a year.	Perpetuelly, noght oonly for a yer.
And also moreover he is a prisoner	And eek therto he is a prisoner
That he goes mad, out of his wits because of woe?	That wood out of his wit he goth for wo?
But Palamon, whom love so afflicts	But Palamon, that love destreyneth so
Who feels double pain and sadness	Who feeleth double soor and hevynesse
These seven years Palamon has sat	Thise seven yeer hath seten Palamoun
In darkness and horrible and strong imprisonment	In derknesse and horrible and strong prisoun
And I will speak of Palamon a little.	And speke I wole of Palamon a lite.
And in this bliss I now leave Arcite,	And in this blisse lete I now Arcite,
There was no man whom Theseus holds dearer.	Ther was no man that Theseus hath derre.
And conducted himself so that, in peace and also in war,	And bar hym so, in pees and eek in werre,
And three years in this manner he led his life,	And thre yeer in this wise his lif he ladde,
So that no man wondered how he acquired it.	That no man wondred how that he it hadde.
But properly and slyly he spent it,	But honestly and slyly he it spente,
And also men brought him out of his country,	And eek men broghte hym out of his contree,
And gave him gold to maintain (a life style suitable to) his rank.	And gaf hym gold to mayntene his degree.
That he has made him a squire of his chamber,	That of his chambre he made hym a squier,
That Theseus has taken him so near	That Theseus hath taken hym so neer
Both for his deeds and his good speech,	Bothe of his dedes and his goode tonge,
And thus within a short time his fame is sprung,	And thus withinne a while his name is spronge,
Where he could exercise his abilities.	Ther as he myghte his vertu excercise.
And put him in noble employment,	And putten hym in worshipful servyse,
If Theseus would advance his rank,	That Theseus wolde enhauncen his degree,
That his fame was (spread) throughout all the court .	That thurghout al the court was his renoun.
He was so noble in manner	He was so gentil of condicioun
Was never in court (anyone) of his rank;	Ne was ther nevere in court of his degree;
But half so well beloved a man as he	But half so wel biloved a man as he
And he said that he was called Philostrate.	And Philostrate he seyde that he highte.
Page of the chamber of Emelye the bright,	Page of the chambre of Emelye the brighte,
A year or two he was in this service,	A yeer or two he was in this servyse,
To do what any one can command him.	To doon that any wight kan hym devyse.
And moreover he was tall and strong of bones	And therto he was long and big of bones
He could well hew wood, and carry water,	Wel koude he hewen wode, and water bere,
Of every servant, who serves here.	Of every servaunt, which that serveth here.
For he was wise and could soon take the measure	For he was wys and koude soone espye,
Who was dwelling with Emelye,	The which that dwellynge was with Emelye,
He was given employment by a household attendant	He fil in office with a chamberleyn
And shortly to speak of this matter,	And shortly of this matere for to seyn,
To drudge and draw water, whatever men will command.	To drugge and drawe, what so men wol devyse.
And at the gate he offers his service	And at the gate he profreth his servyse
And to the court he went upon a day,	And to the court he wente upon a day,
Who was disguised as poorly as he was,	Which was disgised povrely as he was,
Who knew his private affairs and all his situation,	That knew his privetee and al his cas,
And all alone, except only a squire	And al allone, save oonly a squier
And clad himself as a poor laborer,	And cladde hym as a povre laborer,
And right away he changed his clothing,	And right anon he chaunged his array,
And see his lady almost every day.	And seen his lady wel ny day by day.
Live in Athens evermore unknown,	Lyve in Atthenes everemoore unknowe,
He might well, if he conducted himself humbly,	He myghte wel, if that he bar hym lowe,
By the malady which he had endured,	Of maladye the which he hadde endured,
And right away it ran to him in his mind,	And right anon it ran hym in his mynde,
And saw his visage all (changed) to another sort.	And saugh his visage al in another kynde.
And saw that all his color was changed,	And saugh that chaunged was al his colour,
And with that word he picked up a large mirror,	And with that word he caughte a greet mirour,
In her presence I care not if I die."	In hire presence I recche nat to sterve."
From seeing my lady, whom I love and serve.	To se my lady, that I love and serve.
Nor shall I refrain for the dread of death	Ne for the drede of deeth shal I nat spare
Said he, "I will go to Athens right now,	Quod he, "to Atthenes right now wol I fare,
"Now truly, however sorely it may pain me,"	"Now trewely, hou soore that me smerte,"
Where an end of thy woe is destined for thee."	Ther is thee shapen of thy wo an ende."
And said to him thus: "To Athens shalt thou go,	And seyde hym thus: "To Atthenes shaltou wende,
As he was when he put Argus to sleep;	As he was whan that Argus took his sleep;
This god was dressed, as he (Arcite) noticed,	Arrayed was this god, as he took keep,
He wore a hat upon his bright hair.	An hat he werede upon his heris brighte.
His sleep-inducing staff he carried upright in his hand;	His slepy yerde in hond he bar uprighte;
Stood before him and commanded him to be merry.	Biforn hym stood and bad hym to be murie.
It seemed to him that the winged god Mercury	Hym thoughte how that the wynged god Mercurie
Upon one night as he laid himself in sleep,	Upon a nyght in sleep as he hym leyde,
This cruel torment and this pain and woe,	This crueel torment and this peyne and wo,
When he had endured a year or two	Whan he endured hadde a yeer or two
Why should I all daylong write of his woe?	What sholde I al day of his wo endite?
Of him, this woeful lover dan Arcite.	Of hym, this woful lovere daun Arcite.
Both the physical condition and also the mental disposition	Bothe habit and eek disposicioun
And shortly, all was turned topsy-turvy	And shortly, turned was al up so doun
In the front lobe, in his imagination.	Biforen, in his celle fantastik.
Engendered by the melancholic humor	Engendred of humour malencolik
Of Hereos, but rather like mania,	Of Hereos, but rather lyk manye,
And in his behavior for all the world he fared	And in his geere for al the world he ferde
His speech nor his voice, though men heard it.	His speche nor his voys, though men it herde.
And changed so, that no man could know	And chaunged so, that no man koude knowe
So feeble also were his spirits, and so low,	So feble eek were his spiritz, and so lowe,
Then would he weep, he could not be stopped.	Thanne wolde he wepe, he myghte nat be stent.
And if he heard song or instrument,	And if he herde song or instrument,
And wailing all the night, making his moan;	And waillynge al the nyght, makynge his mone;
And he was solitary and ever alone,	And solitarie he was and evere allone,
His hue sickly yellow and pale as cold ashes,	His hewe falow and pale as asshen colde,
So that he became lean and dry as is a stick;	That lene he wex and drye as is a shaft;
He is bereft of his sleep, his food, his drink	His slep, his mete, his drynke, is hym biraft,
That is, or shall (be), while the world may endure.	That is, or shal, whil that the world may dure.
So much sorrow never had creature	So muche sorwe hadde nevere creature
And shortly to conclude (telling) all his woe,	And shortly to concluden al his wo,
For he shall never more see his lady.	For seen his lady shal he nevere mo.
Very often each day he grew faint and said "Alas!"	Ful ofte a day he swelte and seyde "Allas!"
When Arcite was come to Thebes,	Whan that Arcite to Thebes comen was,
For I will tell forth as I began.	For I wol telle forth as I bigan.
But he shall see his lady nevermore.	But seen his lady shal he nevere mo.
That other where he pleases may ride or walk,	That oother wher hym list may ride or go,
But in prison he must always dwell;	But in prison he moot dwelle alway;
That one may see his lady every day,	That oon may seen his lady day by day,
Who has the worse, Arcite or Palamon?	Who hath the worse, Arcite or Palamoun?
Yow lovers now I ask this question:	Yow loveres axe I now this questioun:
Nor nevermore shall see his lady.	Ne nevere mo ne shal his lady see.
For evermore, out of that country,	For everemo, as out of that contree,
And Arcite is exiled on threat of losing his head	And Arcite is exiled upon his heed
Is damned perpetually to prison,	Perpetuelly is dampned to prisoun,
For, briefly to say (it), this Palamon	For, shortly for to seyn, this Palamoun
I know not which has the more woeful task.	I noot which hath the wofuller mester.
Both of the lover and the prisoner.	Bothe of the lovere and the prisoner.
Increase doubly the strong pains	Encressen double wise the peynes stronge
The summer passes, and the long nights	The somer passeth, and the nyghtes longe
And of Arcite forth I will tell you.	And of Arcita forth I wol yow telle.
And leave him to dwell in his prison still,	And lete hym in his prisoun stille dwelle,
Now will I cease (speaking of) of Palamon for a little while,	Now wol I stynte of Palamon a lite,
And Venus slays me on that other side	And Venus sleeth me on that oother syde
Of Thebes with its wide devastated walls;	Of Thebes with his waste walles wyde;
Who has destroyed well nigh all the blood	That hath destroyed wel ny al the blood
And also because of Juno, jealous and also mad,	And eek thurgh Juno, jalous and eek wood,
But I must be in prison because of Saturn,	But I moot been in prisoun thurgh Saturne,
Go at his liberty, and can go where he pleases.	Goon at his large, and where hym list may turne.
That has done mischief to many a true man,	That many a trewe man hath doon mescheef,
Alas, I see a serpent or a thief,	Allas, I se a serpent or a theef,
But well I know that great pain is in this world.	But wel I woot that in this world greet pyne ys.
Without doubt such is the case.	Withouten doute it may stonden so.
Though in this world he may have (had) care and woe.	Though in this world he have care and wo.
But man after his death must weep and lament,	But man after his deeth moot wepe and pleyne,
And when a beast is dead he has no pain;	And whan a beest is deed he hath no peyne;
Whereas a beast may fulfill all his desire.	Ther as a beest may al his lust fulfille.
For God's sake, to refrain from his desire,	For Goddes sake, to letten of his wille,
That man is bound to his duty,	That man is bounden to his observaunce,
And yet this increases all my suffering,	And yet encresseth this al my penaunce,
That torments guiltless innocence?	That giltelees tormenteth innocence?
And often times guiltless, indeed.	And ofte tymes giltelees, pardee.
And has sickness and great adversity,	And hath siknesse and greet adversitee,
And dwells also in prison and detention,	And dwelleth eek in prison and arreest,
For man is slain exactly like another beast,	For slayn is man right as another beest,
Than is the sheep that cowers in the sheepfold?	Than is the sheep that rouketh in the folde?
Why is mankind more obligated unto you	What is mankynde moore unto you holde
Your decision and your eternal decree,	Youre parlement and youre eterne graunt,
And write in the table of adamant (hardest of stones)	And writen in the table of atthamaunt
This world with binding of your eternal word,	This world with byndyng of youre word eterne,
The box tree or the ash dead and cold.	The boxtree or the asshen dede and colde.
So madly that he was to look upon like	So woodly that he lyk was to biholde
Within his breast, and seized him by the heart	Withinne his brest, and hente him by the herte
With that the fire of jealousy started up	Therwith the fyr of jalousie up sterte
That doubles all my torment and my woe."	That doubleth al my torment and my wo."
And also with pain that love gives me also,	And eek with peyne that love me yeveth also,
With all the woe that prison may give me,	With al the wo that prison may me yive,
For I must weep and wail, while I live,	For I moot wepe and wayle, whil I lyve,
More than is mine, who die here in a cage.	Moore than is myn, that sterve here in a cage.
Since thou art at thy liberty, free of prison,	Sith thou art at thy large, of prisoun free,
For, as by way of possibility,	For, as by wey of possibilitee,
For whom I must of necessity lose my life.	For whom that I moste nedes lese my lyf.
Thou mayest have her as lady and as wife	Thow mayst have hire to lady and to wyf
That by some chance or some treaty	That by som aventure or some tretee
And make a war so sharp on this city	And make a werre so sharp on this citee
Assemble all the folk of our family,	Assemblen alle the folk of oure kynrede,
Thou mayest, since thou hast wisdom and manhood,	Thou mayst, syn thou hast wisdom and manhede,
And thou care little about my woe.	And of my wo thow yevest litel charge.
Of all our strife, God knows, the profit is thine.	Of al oure strif, God woot, the fruyt is thyn.
"Alas," said he, "Arcite, cousin mine,	"Allas," quod he, "Arcita, cosyn myn,
Were wet from his bitter, salt tears.	Weren of his bittre, salte teeres wete.
The great fetters themselves on his shins	The pure fettres on his shynes grete
Resounds with his yowling and clamor.	Resouneth of his youlyng and clamour.
He makes such sorrow that the great tour	Swich sorwe he maketh that the grete tour
When he knew Arcite was gone,	Whan that he wiste Arcite was agon,
Upon that other side Palamon,	Upon that oother syde Palamon,
I am as good as dead; there is not any remedy."	I nam but deed; ther nys no remedye."
Whereas now I am exiled from my source of happiness.	Ther now I am exiled fro my wele.
Then I would have been in joy and perfect well-being,	Thanne hadde I been in joye and parfit heele,
That if I might escape from prison,	That if I myghte escapen from prisoun,
Who supposed and had a firm belief	That wende and hadde a greet opinioun
Thus can we all say, and especially I,	Thus may we seyen alle, and namely I,
But we go wrong very often, truly.	But we goon wrong ful often, trewely.
We seek eagerly after felicity,	We seken faste after felicitee,
And certainly, so we fare in this world;	And certes, in this world so faren we;
And to a drunk man the way is slippery.	And to a dronke man the wey is slider.
A drunk man knows well he has a house,	A dronke man woot wel he hath an hous,
We act like one who is drunk as a mouse.	We faren as he that dronke is as a mous.
We know not what thing we pray for here;	We witen nat what thing we preyen heere;
Infinite harms are in this matter.	Infinite harmes been in this mateere.
Who is slain in his house by members of his household.	That in his hous is of his meynee slayn.
And one man would happily (go) out of his prison,	And som man wolde out of his prisoun fayn,
Which is the cause of his murder or great sickness;	That cause is of his mordre or greet siknesse;
One man desires to have riches,	Som man desireth for to han richesse,
Much better than they can themselves imagine?	Wel bettre than they kan hemself devyse?
About the providence of God, or of Fortune,	On purveiaunce of God, or of Fortune,
"Alas, why do folk so commonly complain	"Allas, why pleynen folk so in commune
Farwell my life, my desire, and my gladness!	Farwel my lif, my lust, and my gladnesse!
Well ought I to die in despair and distress.	Wel oughte I sterve in wanhope and distresse.
That can help me or do comfort (to me) in this,	That may me helpe or doon confort in this,
Nor creature that is made of them,	Ne creature that of hem maked is,
That there is not earth, water, fire, nor air,	That ther nys erthe, water, fir, ne eir,
Of all grace, and in so great despair	Of alle grace, and in so greet dispeir
But I, who am exiled and barren	But I, that am exiled and bareyne
That by some chance, since Fortune is changeable,	That by som cas, syn Fortune is chaungeable,
And art a knight, a worthy and an able (one),	And art a knyght, a worthy and an able,
For it is possible, since thou hast her presence,	For possible is, syn thou hast hire presence,
That hast the sight of her, and I the absence.	That hast the sighte of hire, and I th'absence.
Well has Fortune turned the dice for thee,	Wel hath Fortune yturned thee the dys,
In prison? Certainly not, but in paradise!	In prison? Certes nay, but in paradys!
Very blissfully in prison thou can remain --	Ful blisfully in prison maistow dure --
"The victory of this adventure is thine.	"Thyn is the victorie of this aventure.
O dear cousin Palamon," said he,	O deere cosyn Palamon," quod he,
Though I never can deserve her grace,	Though that I nevere hir grace may deserve,
Only the sight of her whom I serve,	Oonly the sighte of hire whom that I serve,
Then would I have been in bliss and not in woe.	Thanne hadde I been in blisse and nat in wo.
Fettered in his prison evermore.	Yfetered in his prisoun everemo.
For else I would have remained with Theseus,	For elles hadde I dwelled with Theseus,
Alas, that ever I knew Perotheus!	Allas, that evere knew I Perotheus!
Not in purgatory, but in hell.	Noght in purgatorie, but in helle.
Now I am destined eternally to dwell	Now is me shape eternally to dwelle
Now my prison is worse than before;	Now is my prisoun worse than biforn;
To slay himself he secretly awaits (an opportunity).	To sleen hymself he waiteth prively.
He weeps, wails, cries piteously;	He wepeth, wayleth, crieth pitously;
He feels the death smite through his heart;	The deeth he feeleth thurgh his herte smyte;
How great a sorrow now suffers Arcite!	How greet a sorwe suffreth now Arcite!
Let him be ware! His neck lies as a pledge.	Lat hym be war! His nekke lith to wedde.
But (he) takes his leave, and homeward he sped.	But taketh his leve, and homward he him spedde.
There was no other remedy nor course of action;	Ther nas noon oother remedie ne reed;
That with a sword he should lose his head.	That with a swerd he sholde lese his heed.
And if he were caught, it was agreed thus,	And he were caught, it was acorded thus,
Ever in his life, by day or night, at any moment	Evere in his lif, by day or nyght, oo stounde
That if it so were that Arcite were found	That if so were that Arcite were yfounde
Between Theseus and this Arcite:	Bitwixen Theseus and hym Arcite:
This was the agreement, plainly to write,	This was the forward, pleynly for t'endite,
In such a manner as shall I tell you.	In swich a gyse as I you tellen shal.
Freely to go all over, wherever he wishes,	Frely to goon wher that hym liste over al,
Duke Theseus let him out of prison	Duc Theseus hym leet out of prisoun
Of Perotheus, without any ransom,	Of Perotheus, withouten any raunsoun,
And finally at request and prayer	And finally at requeste and preyere
Duke Perotheus loved well Arcite,	Duc Perotheus loved wel Arcite,
But of that story I do not desire to write.	But of that storie list me nat to write.
His friend went and sought him down in hell --	His felawe wente and soughte hym doun in helle --
That when one was dead, truly to tell,	That whan that oon was deed, soothly to telle,
So well they loved, as old books say,	So wel they lovede, as olde bookes sayn,
And he (Theseus) loved him as tenderly in turn.	And he loved hym als tendrely agayn.
For in this world he loved no man so (much),	For in this world he loved no man so,
And to amuse himself as he was accustomed to do;	And for to pleye as he was wont to do;
Had come to Athens to visit his friend,	Was come to Atthenes his felawe to visite,
Who was a friend to duke Theseus	That felawe was unto duc Theseus
A worthy duke that was called Perotheus,	A worthy duc that highte Perotheus,
To tell it to you as briefly as I can,	To telle it yow as shortly as I may,
But to the point. It happened on a day,	But to th'effect. It happed on a day,
If I had leisure to tell (it);	If that I hadde leyser for to seye;
Great and long was the strife between them two,	Greet was the strif and long bitwix hem tweye,
And each one of us take his chance."	And everich of us take his aventure."
Here in this prison we must endure,	Heere in this prisoun moote we endure,
And truly, dear brother, this is all.	And soothly, leeve brother, this is al.
Each man for himself, there is no other (way).	Ech man for hymself, ther is noon oother.
And therefore, at the king's court, my brother,	And therfore, at the kynges court, my brother,
And carried away the bone between them both.	And baar awey the boon bitwixe hem bothe.
There came a kite, while they were so angry,	Ther cam a kyte, whil that they were so wrothe,
They fought all day, and yet their share was nothing.	They foughte al day, and yet hir part was noon.
We strive as the hounds did for the bone;	We stryve as dide the houndes for the boon;
Perpetually; no ransom can help us.	Perpetuelly; us gayneth no raunsoun.
That thou and I are condemned to prison	That thou and I be dampned to prisoun
For well thou thyself knowest, truly,	For wel thou woost thyselven, verraily,
And also it is not likely all thy life	And eek it is nat likly al thy lyf
Whether she be maid, or widow, or else wife.	Al be she mayde, or wydwe, or elles wyf.
He can not flee (from) it, though he should be dead,	He may nat fleen it, thogh he sholde be deed,
A man must of necessity love, in spite of all he can do;	A man moot nedes love, maugree his heed;
Is broken every day for love in every way.	Is broken al day for love in ech degree.
And therefore positive (man-made) law and such decree	And therfore positif lawe and swich decree
Than may be given to any earthly man;	Than may be yeve to any erthely man;
Love is a greater law, by my skull,	Love is a gretter lawe, by my pan,
That `who shall give a lover any law?'	That `who shal yeve a lovere any lawe?'
I posit (this assumption): that thou lovedest her first;	I pose that thow lovedest hire biforn;
As to my cousin and my sworn brother.	As to my cosyn and my brother sworn.
For which I told thee my circumstance	For which I tolde thee myn aventure
And mine is love as to a creature;	And myn is love as to a creature;
Thine is a feeling of holiness,	Thyn is affeccioun of hoolynesse,
Whether she is a woman or goddess!	Wheither she be a womman or goddesse!
What wilt thou say? Thou knowest not yet now	What wiltow seyen? Thou woost nat yet now
As a mistress I loved her first before thou.	For paramour I loved hire first er thow.
And thou art false, I tell thee flatly,	And thou art fals, I telle thee outrely,
This Arcite full proudly spoke in return:	This Arcite ful proudly spak ageyn:
Or else thou art false, I dare well say."	Or elles artow fals, I dar wel seyn."
To help me, if it lay in thy power,	To helpen me, if it lay in thy myght,
For which thou art bound as a knight	For which thou art ybounden as a knyght
To further me, as I have told before.	To forthre me, as I have toold biforn.
As to my confidant and my sworn brother	As to my conseil and my brother sworn
I loved hire first, and told thee my woe	I loved hire first, and tolde thee my wo
Nay, certainly, false Arcite, thou shalt not (do) so.	Nay, certes, false Arcite, thow shalt nat so.
And ever shall until my heart dies.	And evere shal til that myn herte sterve.
And now thou wouldest falsely be busy preparing	And now thow woldest falsly been aboute
Thus thou art my trusted confidant, without doubt,	Thus artow of my conseil, out of doute,
I know right well, thou darest not deny it.	I woot right wel, thou darst it nat withseyn.
This was thy oath, and mine also, certainly;	This was thyn ooth, and myn also, certeyn;
In every case, as I shall help thee --	In every cas, as I shal forthren thee --
But rather thou shouldest truly help me	But that thou sholdest trewely forthren me
Nor in any other case, my dear brother,	Ne in noon oother cas, my leeve brother,
Neither of us in love (is) to hinder the other,	Neither of us in love to hyndre oother,
Until death shall part us two,	Til that the deeth departe shal us tweyne,
Sworn very sincerely, and each of us to the other,	Ysworn ful depe, and ech of us til oother,
To me, who am thy cousin and thy brother	To me, that am thy cosyn and thy brother
To be false, nor to be traitor	For to be fals, ne for to be traitour
"It would not be," said he, "any great honor to thee	"It nere," quod he, "to thee no greet honour
This Palamon did knit his two brows.	This Palamon gan knytte his browes tweye.
So help me God, I have no desire to play."	God helpe me so, me list ful yvele pleye."
"Nay," said Arcite, "in earnest, by my faith!	"Nay," quod Arcite, "in ernest, by my fey!
"Sayest thou this in earnest or in play?"	"Wheither seistow this in ernest or in pley?"
Angrily he looked and answered,	Dispitously he looked and answerde,
I am as good as dead; there is no more to say."	I nam but deed; ther nis namoore to seye."
So that I can at least see her,	That I may seen hire atte leeste weye,
And unless I have her mercy and her grace,	And but I have hir mercy and hir grace,
Of her who roams in the yonder place;	Of hire that rometh in the yonder place;
"The fresh beauty slays me suddenly	"The fresshe beautee sleeth me sodeynly
And with a sigh he said piteously,	And with a sigh he seyde pitously,
Arcite is hurt as much as he, or more.	Arcite is hurt as muche as he, or moore.
That, if Palamon was sorely wounded,	That, if that Palamon was wounded sore,
And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,	And with that sighte hir beautee hurte hym so,
And with that word Arcite did see	And with that word Arcite gan espye
Which is brought so low by tyranny."	That is so lowe ybroght by tirannye."
Have some compassion on our (noble) lineage	Of oure lynage have som compassioun,
By eternal decree to die in prison,	By eterne word to dyen in prisoun,
And if it be so that my destiny is shaped	And if so be my destynee be shapen
Help that we may escape out of this prison.	Out of this prisoun help that we may scapen.
Before me, sorrowful, wretched creature,	Bifore me, sorweful, wrecched creature,
Thus to transfigure yourself in this garden	Yow in this gardyn thus to transfigure
And said, "Venus, if it be thy will	And seyde, "Venus, if it be thy wil
But truly it is Venus, as I suppose."	But Venus is it soothly, as I gesse."
I know not whether she is woman or goddess,	I noot wher she be womman or goddesse,
Is cause of all my crying and my woe.	Is cause of al my criyng and my wo.
Yonder in the garden roaming to and fro	Yond in the gardyn romen to and fro
The fairness of that lady whom I see	The fairnesse of that lady that I see
Into my heart, so that it will be the death of me.	Into myn herte, that wol my bane be.
But I was hurt right now through my eye	But I was hurt right now thurghout myn ye
This prison did not cause me to cry out,	This prison caused me nat for to crye,
Thou hast a foolish conception.	Thow hast a veyn ymaginacioun.
This Palamon answered and said in reply,	This Palamon answerde and seyde agayn,
We must endure it; this is the short and plain."	We moste endure it; this is the short and playn."
So stood the heavens when we were born.	So stood the hevene whan that we were born.
Has given us this, although we had sworn it would not be;	Hath yeven us this, although we hadde it sworn;
Of Saturn, by some arrangement of the heavenly bodies,	Of Saturne, by som constellacioun,
Some wicked aspect or disposition	Som wikke aspect or disposicioun
Fortune has given us this adversity.	Fortune hath yeven us this adversitee.
Our imprisonment, for it may not be otherwise.	Oure prisoun, for it may noon oother be.
For the love of God, take all in patience	For Goddes love, taak al in pacience
Who art so pale and deadly to look upon?	That art so pale and deedly on to see?
And said, "My cousin, what ails thee,	And seyde, "Cosyn myn, what eyleth thee,
And with that cry Arcite immediately leaped up	And with that cry Arcite anon up sterte
As though he were stabbed unto the heart.	As though he stongen were unto the herte.
And with that he turned pale and cried, "A!"	And therwithal he bleynte and cride, "A!"
He cast his eye upon Emelye,	He cast his eye upon Emelya,
Of iron, great and square as any beam,	Of iren greet and square as any sparre,
That through a window, thickly set with many a bar	That thurgh a wyndow, thikke of many a barre
And so it happened, by chance or accident,	And so bifel, by aventure or cas,
And to himself lamenting his woe.	And to hymself compleynynge of his wo.
Goes in the chamber roaming to and fro	Goth in the chambre romynge to and fro
This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon,	This sorweful prisoner, this Palamoun,
Was in her walk, and roamed up and down.	Was in hire walk, and romed up and doun.
Where this fresh Emelye the bright	Ther as this fresshe Emelye the shene
And also the garden, full of green branches,	And eek the gardyn, ful of braunches grene,
In which he saw all the noble city,	In which he al the noble citee seigh,
Had risen and roamed in a chamber on high,	Was risen and romed in a chambre an heigh,
As was his custom, by permission of his jailer,	As was his wone, by leve of his gayler,
The sun was bright and clear that morning,	Bright was the sonne and cleer that morwenynge,
Where this Emelye took her pleasure.	Ther as this Emelye hadde hir pleyynge.
Was just next to the garden wall	Was evene joynant to the gardyn wal
Of which I told yow and shall tell),	Of which I tolde yow and tellen shal),
(Where the knights were in prison	(Ther as the knyghtes weren in prisoun
Which was the main fortification of the castle	Which of the castel was the chief dongeoun
The great tower, that was so thick and strong,	The grete tour, that was so thikke and stroong,
And she sang (as) heavenly as an angel.	And as an aungel hevenysshly she soong.
To make an intricate garland for her head;	To make a subtil gerland for hire hede;
She walks up and down, and as she pleases	She walketh up and doun, and as hire liste
And in the garden, at the rising of the sun,	And in the gardyn, at the sonne upriste,
Behind her back, a yard long, I guess.	Bihynde hir bak, a yerde long, I gesse.
Her yellow hair was braided in a tress	Hir yelow heer was broyded in a tresse
She was gaily clothed, so to say:	Yclothed was she fressh, for to devyse:
To do honor to May, and to rise.	To doon honour to May, and for to ryse.
This made Emelye remember	This maked Emelye have remembraunce
And says "Arise, and do thy observance."	And seith "Arys, and do thyn observaunce."
And makes it out of its sleep to awake suddenly,	And maketh it out of his slep to sterte,
For May will have no laziness at night.	For May wole have no slogardie anyght.
She was arisen and all ready prepared,	She was arisen and al redy dight,
Before it was day, as was her custom to do,	Er it were day, as was hir wone to do,
I do not know which was the finer of them two --	I noot which was the fyner of hem two --
For her hue vied with color of the rose,	For with the rose colour stroof hire hewe,
And fresher than the May with new flowers --	And fressher than the May with floures newe --
Than is the lily upon its green stalk,	Than is the lylie upon his stalke grene,
That Emelye, who was fairer to be seen	That Emelye, that fairer was to sene
Until it befell once, in a morning of May,	Till it fil ones, in a morwe of May,
For evermore (remain); no gold can ransom them.	For everemoore; ther may no gold hem quite.
This Palamon and his fellow Arcite	This Palamon and his felawe Arcite
And in a tower, in anguish and in woe,	And in a tour, in angwissh and in wo,
For the duration of his life; what more words are needed?	Terme of his lyf; what nedeth wordes mo?
And there he lives in joy and in honor	And ther he lyveth in joye and in honour
As a conqueror crowned with laurel;	With laurer crowned as a conquerour;
He took his army, and home he rides straightway	He took his hoost, and hoom he rit anon
And when this worthy duke has thus done,	And whan this worthy duc hath thus ydon,
Perpetually -- he would not (accept) any ransom.	Perpetuelly -- he nolde no raunsoun.
Of Theseus; and he very soon sent them	Of Theseus; and he ful soone hem sente
And have carried them softy unto the tent	And han hem caried softe unto the tente
The scavengers have pulled them out of the heap,	Out of the taas the pilours han hem torn,
Of Thebes, and born of two sisters.	Of Thebes, and of sustren two yborn.
As they that were of the royal blood	As they that weren of the blood roial
The heralds best knew them in particular	The heraudes knewe hem best in special
But by their coats of arms and by their equipment	But by hir cote-armures and by hir gere
They were not fully alive, nor fully dead,	Nat fully quyke, ne fully dede they were,
And that other knight was called Palamon.	And that oother knyght highte Palamon.
Both with the same coat of arms, very richly wrought,	Bothe in oon armes, wroght ful richely,
Two young knights lying side by side,	Two yonge knyghtes liggynge by and by,
Pierced through with many a grievous bloody wound,	Thurgh-girt with many a grevous blody wounde,
And (it) so befell that in the heap they found,	And so bifel that in the taas they founde,
After the battle and defeat.	After the bataille and disconfiture.
The scavengers took great pains and worked hard	The pilours diden bisynesse and cure
To strip them of armor and of clothing,	Hem for to strepe of harneys and of wede,
To search in the heap of dead bodies,	To ransake in the taas of bodyes dede,
And did with all the country as he pleased.	And dide with al the contree as hym leste.
Has slain Creon and thus won Thebes,	Hath Creon slayn and wonne Thebes thus,
When this worthy duke, this Theseus,	Whan that this worthy duc, this Theseus,
But briefly to tell is my intent.	But shortly for to telle is myn entente.
Does to the ladies, when they went from him;	Dooth to the ladyes, whan they from hym wente;
That Theseus, the noble conqueror,	That Theseus, the noble conquerour,
Of the bodies, and the great honor	Of the bodies, and the grete honour
That the ladies made at the burning	That the ladyes made at the brennynge
The great clamor and the lamentation	The grete clamour and the waymentynge
But it would be all too long to describe	But it were al to longe for to devyse
The bones of their husbands who were slain,	The bones of hir freendes that were slayn,
And he gave back to the ladies	And to the ladyes he restored agayn
And tore down both wall and beam and rafter;	And rente adoun bothe wall and sparre and rafter;
And by assault he won the city afterwards,	And by assaut he wan the citee after,
In open battle, and put the army to flight;	In pleyn bataille, and putte the folk to flyght;
He fought, and slew him boldly as a knight	He faught, and slough hym manly as a knyght
With Creon, who was king of Thebes,	With Creon, which that was of Thebes kyng,
But briefly to speak of this thing,	But shortly for to speken of this thyng,
Graciously in a field, where he intended to fight.	Faire in a feeld, ther as he thoughte to fighte.
And in his army the flower of chivalry,	And in his hoost of chivalrie the flour,
Thus rides this duke, thus rides this conqueror,	Thus rit this duc, thus rit this conquerour,
The Minotaur, which he defeated in Crete.	The Mynotaur, which that he wan in Crete.
Of very rich gold, in which there was embroidered	Of gold ful riche, in which ther was ybete
And by his banner is carried his pennon	And by his baner born is his penoun
That all the fields glitter all around;	That alle the feeldes glyteren up and doun;
So shines in his large white banner	So shyneth in his white baner large
The red statue of Mars, with spear and shield,	The rede statue of Mars, with spere and targe,
And forth he rides; there is no more to tell.	And forth he rit; ther is namoore to telle.
And Emelye, her beautiful young sister,	And Emelye, hir yonge suster sheene,
And sent straightway Ypolita the queen,	And sente anon Ypolita the queene,
But that night he lay (camped) on his way,	But onward on his wey that nyght he lay,
Nor take his ease fully half a day,	Ne take his ese fully half a day,
He would not walk nor ride any nearer to Athens,	No neer Atthenes wolde he go ne ride,
Toward Thebes, and all his army beside (him).	To Thebes-ward, and al his hoost biside.
He displays his banner, and rode forth	His baner he desplayeth, and forth rood
And right away, without more delay,	And right anoon, withouten moore abood,
As one who had very well deserved his death.	As he that hadde his deeth ful wel deserved.
That all the people of Greece should speak (about)	That al the peple of Grece sholde speke
To avenge them upon the tyrant Creon	Upon the tiraunt Creon hem to wreke
(That) he would do his might so completely	He wolde doon so ferforthly his myght
And swore his oath, as he was true knight,	And swoor his ooth, as he was trewe knyght,
And comforts them with very good will,	And hem conforteth in ful good entente,
And in his arms he caught up them all,	And in his armes he hem alle up hente,
That once were of such high rank;	That whilom weren of so greet estaat;
When he saw them so pitiful and so dejected,	Whan he saugh hem so pitous and so maat,
It seemed to him that his heart would break,	Hym thoughte that his herte wolde breke,
This gentle duke leaped down from his war horse	This gentil duc doun from his courser sterte
And let our sorrow sink in thy heart."	And lat oure sorwe synken in thyn herte."
"Have some mercy on us wretched women,	"Have on us wrecched wommen som mercy,
They fell face down and cried piteously,	They fillen gruf and criden pitously,
And with that word, without more delay,	And with that word, withouten moore respit,
But makes hounds eat them as an insult."	But maketh houndes ete them in despit."
Neither to be buried nor burned,	Neither to been yburyed nor ybrent,
And will not allow them, not at all,	And wol nat suffren hem, by noon assent,
Has dragged all the bodies in a heap,	Hath alle the bodyes on an heep ydrawe,
To do dishonor to the dead bodies	To do the dede bodyes vileynye
He, for spite and for his tyranny,	He, for despit and for his tirannye,
Filled with anger and with iniquity,	Fulfild of ire and of iniquitee,
Who is now lord of the city of Thebes,	That lord is now of Thebes the citee,
And yet now the old Creon -- woe oh woe! --	And yet now the olde Creon -- weylaway! --
While the siege lay around it.	Whil that the seege theraboute lay.
We lost all our husbands at that town,	We losten alle oure housbondes at that toun,
And make all this lamentation,	And maken al this lamentacioun,
And all of us who are in this condition	And alle we that been in this array
Was once wife to king Cappaneus,	Was whilom wyf to kyng Cappaneus,
"I, wretch, who weep and wail thus,	"I, wrecche, which that wepe and wayle thus,
Now help us, lord, since it is in thy power.	Now help us, lord, sith it is in thy myght.
We have been waiting all this fortnight.	We han ben waitynge al this fourtenyght.
Here in this temple of the goddess Clemency	Heere in this temple of the goddesse Clemence
And certainly, lord, to await your presence,	And certes, lord, to abyden youre presence,
Who assures no estate (will continue) to be well.	That noon estaat assureth to be weel.
Thanks be to Fortune and her false wheel,	Thanked be Fortune and hire false wheel,
Now we are miserable wretches, as it is easily seen,	Now be we caytyves, as it is wel seene,
For, certainly, lord, there is not one of us all	For, certes, lord, ther is noon of us alle
Let thou fall upon us wretched women,	Upon us wrecched wommen lat thou falle,
Some drop of pity, because of thy nobility,	Som drope of pitee, thurgh thy gentillesse,
Have mercy on our woe and our distress!	Have mercy on oure wo and oure distresse!
But we beseech (you for) mercy and succor.	But we biseken mercy and socour.
Your glory and your honor does not grieve us,	Nat greveth us youre glorie and youre honour,
Victory, and (allowed) to live as a conqueror,	Victorie, and as a conqueror to lyven,
She said, "Lord, to whom Fortune has given	She seyde, "Lord, to whom Fortune hath yiven
That it was pitiful to see and hear;	That it was routhe for to seen and heere;
The eldest lady of them all spoke,	The eldeste lady of them alle spak,
And why you are clothed thus in black."	And why that ye been clothed thus in blak."
And tell me if it may be remedied,	And telleth me if it may been amended,
Or who has injured or offended you?	Or who hath yow mysboden or offended?
Of my honor, (you) who thus lament and cry?	Of myn honour, that thus compleyne and crye?
Said Theseus. "Have you such great envy	Quod Theseus. "Have ye so greet envye
So disturb my festival with crying?"	Perturben so my feste with criynge?"
"What folk are you, who at my homecoming	"What folk been ye, that at myn hom-comynge
Until they seized the reins of his bridle.	Til they the reynes of his brydel henten.
That (ever) heard lamentation such as this;	That herde swich another waymentynge;
That in this world is no living creature	That in this world nys creature lyvynge
But such a cry and such a woeful (lament) they make	But swich a cry and swich a wo they make
Each after another, clad in black clothes;	Ech after oother clad in clothes blake;
A company of ladies, two by two,	A compaignye of ladyes, tweye and tweye,
Where there kneeled in the high way	Where that ther kneled in the heighe weye
He was aware, as he cast his eye aside,	He was war, as he caste his eye aside,
In all his prosperity and in his most pride,	In al his wele and in his mooste pride,
When he was come almost unto the town,	Whan he was come almoost unto the toun,
And where I left off, I will again begin.	And ther I lefte, I wol ayeyn bigynne.
And let's see now who shall win the supper;	And lat se now who shal the soper wynne;
Let every fellow tell his tale in turn,	Lat every felawe telle his tale aboute,
Also I will not hinder any one of this company;	I wol nat letten eek noon of this route;
The remnant of the tale is long enough.	The remenant of the tale is long ynough.
And the oxen in my plow are weak.	And wayke been the oxen in my plough.
I have, God knows, a large field to till,	I have, God woot, a large feeld to ere,
But all that matter I must now forgo.	But al that thyng I moot as now forbere.
And of the storm at her home-coming;	And of the tempest at hir hoom-comynge;
The fair, bold queen of Scithia;	The faire, hardy queene of Scithia;
And how Ypolita was besieged,	And how asseged was Ypolita,
Between Athenians and Amazons;	Bitwixen Atthenes and Amazones;
And of the great battle at that time	And of the grete bataille for the nones
By Theseus and by his chivalry;	By Theseus and by his chivalrye;
How the reign of Femenye was won	How wonnen was the regne of Femenye
I would have told you fully the manner	I wolde have toold yow fully the manere
And certainly, if it were not too long to hear,	And certes, if it nere to long to heere,
And all his host in arms beside him.	And al his hoost in armes hym bisyde.
And thus with victory and with festivity	And thus with victorie and with melodye
And also her young sister Emelye.	And eek hir yonge suster Emelye.
With much glory and great ceremony,	With muchel glorie and greet solempnytee,
And brought her home with him into his country	And broghte hire hoom with hym in his contree
And wedded the queen Ypolita,	And weddede the queene Ypolita,
That once was called Scithia,	That whilom was ycleped Scithia,
He conquered all the land of the Amazons,	He conquered al the regne of Femenye,
What with his wisdom and his chivalry,	What with his wysdom and his chivalrie,
Very many a powerful country had he won;	Ful many a riche contree hadde he wonne;
And in his time such a conqueror	And in his tyme swich a conquerour
He was lord and governor of Athens,	Of Atthenes he was lord and governour,
There was a duke who was called Theseus;	Ther was a duc that highte Theseus;
Once, as old histories tell us,	Whilom, as olde stories tellen us,
Hold well thy tongue and think upon the crow."	Kepe wel thy tonge and thenk upon the crowe."
Wherever thou come, amongst high or low,	Whereso thou come, amonges hye or lowe,
Of tidings, whether they be false or true.	Of tidynges, wheither they been false or trewe.
My son, beware, and be no author new	My sone, be war, and be noon auctour newe
A tale of which he is now very sorry.	A tale of which he is now yvele apayd.
Though he repent, or be ever so unwilling (it be known).	Though hym repente, or be hym nevere so looth.
Thing that is said is said, and forth it goes,	Thyng that is seyd is seyd, and forth it gooth,
He can by no way call his word back.	He may by no wey clepe his word agayn.
But he who has spoken evil, I dare well say,	But he that hath mysseyd, I dar wel sayn,
Thou need not dread to be betrayed;	Thee thar nat drede for to be biwreyd;
My son, if thou no wicked word hast said,	My sone, if thou no wikked word hast seyd,
That little tale-telling causes much rest.	That litel janglyng causeth muchel reste.
The Fleming says, and learn it if thou please,	The Flemyng seith, and lerne it if thee leste,
A tale-teller speak of perilous matter.	A janglere speke of perilous mateere.
My son, speak not, but with thy head thou nod.	My sone, spek nat, but with thyn heed thou bekke.
Read David in his psalms; read Seneca.	Reed David in his psalmes; reed Senekke.
Read Salomon, so wise and honorable;	Reed Salomon, so wys and honurable;
A tale-teller is to God abominable.	A jangler is to God abhomynable.
A tongue cuts friendship all in two.	A tonge kutteth freendshipe al a-two.
An arm in two, my dear son, just so	An arm a-two, my deere sone, right so
Right as a sword cuts and carves	Right as a swerd forkutteth and forkerveth
Knowest thou what a rash tongue serves for?	Wostow wherof a rakel tonge serveth?
In much speech sin is not lacking.	In muchel speche synne wanteth naught.
Where less speaking had well enough sufficed,	Ther lasse spekyng hadde ynough suffised,
My son, of much ill-considered speaking,	My sone, of muchel spekyng yvele avysed,
Thus learn children when they are young.	Thus lerne children whan that they been yonge.
Is to restrain and guard well thy tongue;	Is to restreyne and kepe wel thy tonge;
The first virtue, son, if thou will learn,	The firste vertu, sone, if thou wolt leere,
To speak of God, in honor and prayer.	To speke of God, in honour and preyere.
At all times, but when thou make an effort	At alle tymes, but whan thou doost thy peyne
My son, thy tongue thou should restrain	My sone, thy tonge sholdestow restreyne
Is no man harmed, to speak generally.	Is no man shent, to speke generally.
Has many a man been ruined, as clerks teach,	Hath many a man been spilt, as clerkes teche,
My son, very often, for too much speech	My sone, ful ofte, for to muche speche
So that man should think about what he may speak.	For man sholde hym avyse what he speeke.
Walled a tongue with teeth and lips also,	Walled a tonge with teeth and lippes eke,
My son, God of his endless goodness	My sone, God of his endelees goodnesse
My son, from a fiend men can bless themselves.	My sone, from a feend men may hem blesse.
A wicked tongue is worse than a fiend;	A wikked tonge is worse than a feend;
My son, hold well thy tongue, and keep thy friend.	My sone, keep wel thy tonge, and keep thy freend.
"My son, think on the crow, in God's name!	"My sone, thenk on the crowe, a Goddes name!
But, as I said, I am not learned.	But, as I seyde, I am noght textueel.
Teaches a man to guard his tongue well.	Techeth a man to kepen his tonge weel.
Dan Salomon, as wise clerks say,	Daun Salomon, as wise clerkes seyn,
He will hate you mortally, certainly.	He wol yow haten mortally, certeyn.
How another man has copulated with his wife;	How that another man hath dight his wyf;
And tell never any man in your life	Ne telleth nevere no man in youre lyf
Beware, and take care what you say:	Beth war, and taketh kep what that ye seye:
Gentlemen, by this example I you pray,	Lordynges, by this ensample I yow preye,
And because of this case all crows are black.	And for this caas been alle crowes blake.
And also his speech, and out the door slung him	And eek his speche, and out at dore hym slong
And made him black, and took away all his song,	And made hym blak, and refte hym al his song,
And pulled out his white feathers every one,	And pulled his white fetheres everychon,
And to the crow he rushed, and that right away,	And to the crowe he stirte, and that anon,
As a sign that through thee my wife is slain."	In tokenynge that thurgh thee my wyf is slayn."
But ever cry in anticipation of tempest and rain,	But evere crie agayn tempest and rayn,
Nor never sweet noise shall you make,	Ne nevere sweete noyse shul ye make,
Thou and thy offspring ever shall be black,	Thou and thyn ofspryng evere shul be blake,
Thus shall men on a traitor be avenged;	Thus shal men on a traytour been awreke;
And also thy white feathers every one,	And eek thy white fetheres everichon,
Now shalt thou, false thief, give up thy song,	Now shaltow, false theef, thy song forgon,
Thou once sang like a nightingale;	Thou songe whilom lyk a nyghtyngale;
"I will pay thee back immediately (for) thy false tale.	"I wol thee quite anon thy false tale.
And to the crow, "O false thief!" said he,	And to the crowe, "O false theef!" seyde he,
Alas! For sorrow I will myself slay!"	Allas! For sorwe I wol myselven slee!"
Completely undone, and brought them in the mire.	Fully fordoon, and broght hem in the mire.
Alas, a thousand folk has rash anger	Allas, a thousand folk hath rakel ire
Upon your anger caused by suspicion.	Upon youre ire for suspecion.
And be advised well and soberly	And beeth avysed wel and sobrely
Smite not too soon, before you know why,	Smyt nat to soone, er that ye witen why,
Do not believe any thing without strong evidence.	Ne trowe no thyng withouten strong witnesse.
O every man, beware of rashness!	O every man, be war of rakelnesse!
Where was thy wit and thy discretion?	Where was thy wit and thy discrecion?
O mistrust, full of false suspicion,	O wantrust, ful of fals suspecion,
That recklessly smites the guiltless!	That unavysed smyteth gilteles!
O troubled wit, O reckless anger,	O trouble wit, O ire recchelees,
O rash hand, to do so foul a crime!	O rakel hand, to doon so foule amys!
Now liest thou dead, with face pale of hue,	Now listow deed, with face pale of hewe,
Who were to me so stable and also so true,	That were to me so sad and eek so trewe,
O dear wife! O gem of delight!	O deere wyf! O gemme of lustiheed!
Alas, that I was wrought! Why was I not dead?	Allas, that I was wroght! Why nere I deed?
Thou hast me brought to my ruin;	Thou hast me broght to my confusioun;
"Traitor," said he, "with tongue of scorpion,	"Traitour," quod he, "with tonge of scorpioun,
And after that thus spoke he to the crow:	And after that thus spak he to the crowe:
And also he broke his arrows and his bow,	And eek he brak his arwes and his bowe,
Both harp, and lute, and cither, and psaltery;	Bothe harpe, and lute, and gyterne, and sautrie;
This is the substance of it; there is no more to say;	This is th' effect; ther is namoore to sayn;
And in his ire his wife then has he slain.	And in his ire his wyf thanne hath he slayn.
His bow he bent, and set therein an arrow,	His bowe he bente, and sette therinne a flo,
And thought his sorrowful heart would break in two.	And thoughte his sorweful herte brast atwo.
This Phoebus began to turn away,	This Phebus gan aweyward for to wryen,
And told him repeatedly he saw it with his eyes.	And tolde hym ofte he saugh it with his yen.
To his great shame and to his great dishonor,	Hym to greet shame and to greet vileynye,
How his wife had done her lechery,	How that his wyf had doon hire lecherye,
By clear evidence and by bold words,	By sadde tokenes and by wordes bolde,
For on thy bed I saw him copulate with thy wife."	For on thy bed thy wyf I saugh hym swyve."
The value of a gnat, as I may thrive!	The montance of a gnat, so moote I thryve!
Not worth, compared to thee,	Noght worth to thee, as in comparisoun,
By one of little reputation,	With oon of litel reputacioun,
For all thy watching, thou hast been tricked	For al thy waityng, blered is thyn ye
For all thy song and all thy music,	For al thy song and al thy mynstralcye,
For all thy beauty and thy nobility,	For al thy beautee and thy gentilesse,
Phoebus," said he, "for all thy worthiness,	Phebus," quod he, "for al thy worthynesse,
"By God," said he, "I sing not amiss.	"By God," quod he, "I synge nat amys.
That to my heart it was a rejoicing	That to myn herte it was a rejoysynge
Were thou not accustomed so merrily to sing	Ne were thow wont so myrily to synge
"What, bird?" said Phoebus. "What song singest thou?	"What, bryd?" quod Phebus. "What song syngestow?
This crow sang "Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Cuckoo!"	This crowe sang "Cokkow! Cokkow! Cokkow!"
And when home was come Phoebus, the lord,	And whan that hoom was come Phebus, the lord,
Beheld their work, and said never a word.	Biheeld hire werk, and seyde never a word.
The white crow, that hanged always in the cage,	The white crowe, that heeng ay in the cage,
Right away they satisfied all their reckless lust.	Anon they wroghten al hire lust volage.
When Phoebus wife had sent for her leman,	Whan Phebus wyf had sent for hir lemman,
I will tell nothing of texts, never a bit;	I wol noght telle of textes never a deel;
But because I am not a learned man,	But for I am a man noght textueel,
Men call him an outlaw or a thief.	Men clepen hym an outlawe or a theef.
Nor bring a country to such great mischief,	Ne brynge a contree to so greet mescheef,
And can not do as much harm as he,	And may nat doon so greet an harm as he,
And because the outlaw has but a small group of followers,	And for the outlawe hath but smal meynee,
Lo, therefore is he called a captain;	Lo, therfore is he cleped a capitayn;
And burn house and home, and level everything,	And brennen hous and hoom, and make al playn,
By the size of his army to slay downright,	By force of meynee for to sleen dounright,
To Alexander was told this sentence,	To Alisaundre was toold this sentence,
The same I say: there is no difference.	The same I seye: ther is no difference.
And an outlaw or an arrant thief,	And an outlawe or a theef erraunt,
Right so between an usurping tyrant	Right so bitwixe a titlelees tiraunt
Men lay that one as low as lies that other.	Men leyn that oon as lowe as lith that oother.
And, God it knows, my own dear brother,	And, God it woot, myn owene deere brother,
She shall be called his wench or his sweetie.	She shal be cleped his wenche or his lemman.
And because that other is a poor woman,	And for that oother is a povre womman,
She shall be called his lady, as in love;	She shal be cleped his lady, as in love;
If it so be they work both amiss --	If it so be they werke bothe amys --
And a poor wench, other than this --	And a povre wenche, oother than this --
If of her body dishonest she bee,	If of hir body dishonest she bee,
Between a wife that is of high degree,	Bitwixe a wyf that is of heigh degree,
There is no difference, truly,	Ther nys no difference, trewely,
I am an unlearned man, right thus say I:	I am a boystous man, right thus seye I:
The word must be cousin to the deed.	The word moot cosyn be to the werkyng.
If men shall tell a thing properly,	If men shal telle proprely a thyng,
The word must by necessity accord with the deed.	The word moot nede accorde with the dede.
Forgive it me, and that I you beseech.	Foryeveth it me, and that I yow biseche.
Her sweetheart? Certes, this is a knavish speech!	Hir lemman? Certes, this is a knavyssh speche!
His wife immediately has for her sweetheart sent.	His wyf anon hath for hir lemman sent.
And so befell, when Phoebus was absent,	And so bifel, whan Phebus was absent,
Of which there comes much harm and woe.	Of which ther cometh muchel harm and wo.
The more harm is, it happens often so,	The moore harm is, it happeth ofte so,
Worth nothing in comparison to Phoebus.	Nat worth to Phebus in comparisoun.
A man of little reputation,	A man of litel reputacioun,
For under him another had she,	For under hym another hadde shee,
This Phoebus, who thought upon no guile,	This Phebus, which that thoghte upon no gile,
That is consonant with virtue for any length of time.	That sowneth into vertu any while.
That we can not take pleasure in anything	That we ne konne in nothyng han plesaunce
Flesh is so fond of novelty, curses on it,	Flessh is so newefangel, with meschaunce,
Nor never so true, nor so gracious.	Ne never so trewe, ne so debonaire.
Than on their wives, be they never so fair,	Than on hire wyves, be they never so faire,
On lower things to perform their delight	On lower thyng to parfourne hire delit
For men have ever a lecherous appetite	For men han evere a likerous appetit
That are untrue, and nothing about women.	That been untrewe, and nothyng by wommen.
In time when she lusts to have a mate.	In tyme whan hir lust to han a make.
Or least of reputation, will she take,	Or leest of reputacioun, wol she take,
The most crude wolf that she can find,	The lewedeste wolf that she may fynde,
A she-wolf has also an evil nature.	A she-wolf hath also a vileyns kynde.
And appetite drives away discretion.	And appetit fleemeth discrecioun.
Lo, here has lust his domination,	Lo, heere hath lust his dominacioun,
Such appetite has he to eat a mouse.	Swich appetit hath he to ete a mous.
And every dainty that is in that house,	And every deyntee that is in that hous,
Right then he refuses milk and meat and all,	Anon he weyveth milk and flessh and al,
And tender meat, and make his couch of silk,	And tendre flessh, and make his couche of silk,
Let's take a cat, and foster him well with milk	Lat take a cat, and fostre hym wel with milk
His liberty this bird desires always.	His libertee this brid desireth ay.
To escape out of his cage, if he can.	To escape out of his cage, yif he may.
For ever this bird will work diligently	For evere this brid wol doon his bisynesse
Go eat worms and such wretched food.	Goon ete wormes and swich wrecchednesse.
Rather in a forest that is rude and cold	Levere in a forest that is rude and coold
Yet would this bird, by twenty thousand times,	Yet hath this brid, by twenty thousand foold,
Although his cage of gold be never so gay,	Although his cage of gold be never so gay,
Of all dainties that thou can imagine,	Of alle deyntees that thou kanst bithynke,
To foster it tenderly with food and drink	To fostre it tendrely with mete and drynke
And give all thy attention and take thy pains	And do al thyn entente and thy corage
Take any bird, and put it in a cage,	Taak any bryd, and put it in a cage,
Has naturally set in a creature.	Hath natureelly set in a creature.
And restrain a thing which nature	As to destreyne a thyng which that nature
But God knows it, there can no man embrace	But God it woot, ther may no man embrace
That no man should have put him out of her grace.	That no man sholde han put hym from hir grace.
And for his manly qualities and his behavior,	And for his manhede and his governaunce,
This worthy Phoebus does all that he can	This worthy Phebus dooth al that he kan
But now to purpose, as I first began:	But now to purpos, as I first bigan:
Thus wrote old clerks in their time.	Thus writen olde clerkes in hir lyves.
To waste labor guarding wives:	To spille labour for to kepe wyves:
This hold I for a real act of folly,	This holde I for a verray nycetee,
To keep a shrew, for it will not be.	To kepe a shrewe, for it wol nat bee.
And truly the labor is in vain	And trewely the labour is in vayn
Should not be constantly watched, certainly;	Sholde nat been kept in noon awayt, certayn;
A good wife, who is clean of deed and thought,	A good wyf, that is clene of werk and thoght,
And so is every person in such a situation;	And so is every wight in swich degree;
For he was loath to be tricked,	For hym were looth byjaped for to be,
Jealous he was, and would eagerly have kept her.	Jalous he was, and wolde have kept hire fayn.
Save only, if I shall say the truth,	Save oonly, if the sothe that I shal sayn,
To please her and do her reverence,	Hir for to plese and doon hire reverence,
And night and day did ever his efforts	And nyght and day dide evere his diligence
Whom he loved more than his life,	Which that he lovede moore than his lyf,
Now had this Phoebus in his house a woman	Now hadde this Phebus in his hous a wyf
Sing so wonderfully merrily and well.	Syngen so wonder myrily and weel.
Therewith in all this world no nightingale	Therwith in al this world no nyghtyngale
He could, when he should tell a tale.	He koude, whan he sholde telle a tale.
And imitate the speech of every man	And countrefete the speche of every man
White was this crow as is a snow-white swan,	Whit was this crowe as is a snow-whit swan,
And taught it to speak, as men teach a jay.	And taughte it speken, as men teche a jay.
Which in a cage he fostered many a day,	Which in a cage he fostred many a day,
Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow	Now hadde this Phebus in his hous a crowe
Was accustomed to bear in his hand a bow.	Was wont to beren in his hand a bowe.
Over Phitoun, as tells us the story,	Of Phitoun, so as telleth us the storie,
As well in generosity as in chivalry,	As wel in fredom as in chivalrie,
This Phoebus, which was the flower of knighthood,	This Phebus, that was flour of bachilrie,
Of honor, and of perfect worthiness.	Of honour, and of parfit worthynesse.
He was therewith filled full of nobility,	He was therwith fulfild of gentillesse,
For in this world was no one so handsome alive.	For in this world was noon so faire on-lyve.
What needs it his features to describe?	What nedeth it his fetures to discryve?
That is or was since the world began.	That is or was sith that the world bigan.
Thereto he was the best looking man	Therto he was the semelieste man
Could never sing half so well as he.	Koude nevere syngen half so wel as hee.
Certainly the king of Thebes, Amphioun,	Certes the kyng of Thebes, Amphioun,
To hear of his clear voice the sound.	To heeren of his cleere voys the soun.
And sing so that it was a pleasure	And syngen that it was a melodie
He could play on every minstrelsy,	Pleyen he koude on every mynstralcie,
He wrought with his bow, as men may read.	He with his bowe wroghte, as men may rede.
And many another noble worthy deed	And many another noble worthy dede
Sleeping in the sun upon a day;	Slepynge agayn the sonne upon a day;
He slew Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay	He slow Phitoun, the serpent, as he lay
In all this world, and also the best archer.	In al this world, and eek the beste archer.
As old books make mention,	As olde bookes maken mencioun,
When Phoebus dwelled down here in this earth,	Whan Phebus dwelled heere in this erthe adoun,
Here begins the Manciple's Tale of the Crow.	Heere bigynneth the Maunciples Tale of the Crowe.
"Well, sir," said he, "now hearken what I say."	"Wel, sire," quod he, "now herkneth what I seye."
Tell on thy tale, Manciple, I thee pray."	Telle on thy tale, Manciple, I thee preye."
Of that matter you get no more of me.	Of that mateere ye gete namoore of me.
Worship and thanks be to thy deity!	Worshipe and thank be to thy deitee!
Who so can turn earnest into game!	That so kanst turnen ernest into game!
"O Bacchus, blessed be thy name,	"O Bacus, yblessed be thy name,
For that will turn rancor and strife	For that wol turne rancour and disese
Wherever we go, to carry good drink with us;	Where that we goon, good drynke with us carie;
And said, "I see well it is necessary,	And seyde, "I se wel it is necessarie,
Then began our Host to laugh wonderfully loud,	Thanne gan oure Hoost to laughen wonder loude,
And thanked him in such a way as he could.	And thanked hym in swich wise as he koude.
And of that drink the Cook was wonderfully pleased,	And of that drynke the Cook was wonder fayn,
To the Manciple he gave the gourd again;	To the Manciple he took the gourde agayn;
And when he had blown in this horn,	And whan he hadde pouped in this horn,
Why did he need that? He drank enough before.	What neded hym? He drank ynough biforn.
And certainly, to tell it as it was,	And certeynly, to tellen as it was,
Upon pain of death, he will not say me nay."	Up peyne of deeth, he wol nat seye me nay."
This Cook shall drink thereof, if I may.	This Cook shal drynke therof, if I may.
And right away you shall see a good joke.	And right anon ye shul seen a good jape.
A draught of wine, yes, of a ripe grape,	A draghte of wyn, ye, of a ripe grape,
And do you know what? I have here in a gourd	And wite ye what? I have heer in a gourde
That which I spoke, I said it in my joking.	That that I spak, I seyde it in my bourde.
I will not anger him, as I may thrive!	I wol nat wratthen hym, also moot I thryve!
That he rides on, than he should strive with me.	Which he rit on, than he sholde with me stryve.
In that way he could easily bring me into the trap.	So myghte he lightly brynge me in the snare.
"No," said the Manciple, "that would be a great mischief!	"No," quod the Manciple, "that were a greet mescheef!
That may not be honest, if it comes to proof."	That were nat honest, if it cam to preef."
As for to find fault with thy accounts,	As for to pynchen at thy rekenynges,
I mean, he would speak of small things,	I meene, he speke wole of smale thynges,
Recall thee and bring thee to the lure (like a hawk);	Reclayme thee and brynge thee to lure;
Another day he would, perhaps,	Another day he wole, peraventure,
Thus openly to reprove him of his vice.	Thus openly repreve hym of his vice.
"But yet, Manciple, in faith thou art too foolish,	"But yet, Manciple, in feith thou art to nyce,
In lifting up his heavy drunken body.	In liftyng up his hevy dronken cors.
Then shall we all have enough to do	Thanne shal we alle have ynogh to doone
And if he fall from his horse again,	And if he falle from his capul eftsoone,
To keep him and his horse out of the mud;	To kepen hym and his capul out of the slough;
"He has also more than enough to do	"He hath also to do moore than ynough
And sneezes fast, and also he has a head cold.	And fneseth faste, and eek he hath the pose.
That he has drunk, he speaks in his nose,	That he hath dronke, he speketh in his nose,
For, were it wine or old or new ale	For, were it wyn or oold or moysty ale
I believe he would tell his tale badly.	I trowe he lewedly wolde telle his tale.
"Because drink has domination	"By cause drynke hath dominacioun
And to the Manciple then spoke our Host:	And to the Manciple thanne spak oure Hoost:
So unwieldy was this sorry enfeebled soul.	So unweeldy was this sory palled goost.
To lift him up, and much care and woe,	To lifte hym up, and muchel care and wo,
There was great shoving both to and fro	Ther was greet showvyng bothe to and fro
And before he was again in his saddle,	And er that he agayn were in his sadel,
Alas, he had not kept himself by his ladle (i.e., stayed home)!	Allas, he nadde holde hym by his ladel!
This was a fine feat of horsemanship by a cook!	This was a fair chyvachee of a cook!
Where he lay, until men lifted him up.	Where as he lay, til that men hym up took.
And on the Manciple he began to shake his head fast	And on the Manciple he gan nodde faste
And with this speech the Cook became angry and enraged,	And with this speche the Cook wax wrooth and wraw,
And that is when men play with a straw."	And that is whan men pleyen with a straw."
I believe that you have drunk until you act like an ape,	I trowe that ye dronken han wyn ape,
It seems to me you are in good shape for that!	Therto me thynketh ye been wel yshape!
Now, sweet sir, will you joust at the quintain?	Now, sweete sire, wol ye justen atte fan?
Ah, take heed, sirs, of this lusty man.	A, taketh heede, sires, of this lusty man.
Fie, stinking swine! Fie, may foul fortune thee befall!	Fy, stynkyng swyn! Fy, foule moote thee falle!
Thy cursed breath would infect us all.	Thy cursed breeth infecte wole us alle.
Keep thy mouth closed, man, by thy father's kin!	Hoold cloos thy mouth, man, by thy fader kyn!
As though he would swallow us right away.	As though he wolde swolwe us anonright.
See how he yawns, lo, this drunken fellow,	See how he ganeth, lo, this dronken wight,
By me, certainly, thou shalt not be deceived.	Of me, certeyn, thou shalt nat been yglosed.
That shows well thou art not in good health.	That sheweth wel thou art nat wel disposed.
And, well I know, thy breath full sourly stinks:	And, wel I woot, thy breeth ful soure stynketh:
Thy eyes are dazed also, as it seems to me,	Thyne eyen daswen eek, as that me thynketh,
For, in good faith, thy visage is full pale,	For, in good feith, thy visage is ful pale,
I will for now excuse thee of thy tale.	I wol as now excuse thee of thy tale.
Who rides here in this company,	Which that heere rideth in this compaignye,
To thee, sir Cook, and be displeasing to no person,	To thee, sire Cook, and to no wight displese,
"Well," said the Manciple, "if it may give relief	"Wel," quod the Maunciple, "if it may doon ese
Than (have) the best gallon of wine in Cheapside."	Than the beste galon wyn in Chepe."
Know I not why, that I would rather sleep	Noot I nat why, that me were levere slepe
There is fallen on me such heaviness,	As ther is falle on me swich hevynesse,
Said to our Host, "God bless my soul,	Seyde to oure Hoost, "So God my soule blesse,
This Cook, who was full pale and not at all red,	This Cook, that was ful pale and no thyng reed,
So that thou can not hold up thy head?"	So that thow mayst nat holden up thyn heed?"
Hast thou had fleas all night, or art thou drunk?	Hastow had fleen al nyght, or artow dronke?
What ails thee to sleep in the morning?	What eyleth thee to slepe by the morwe?
Awake, thou Cook," said he, "God give thee sorrow!	Awake, thou Cook," quod he, "God yeve thee sorwe!
Although it be not worth a bundle of hay.	Although it be nat worth a botel hey.
For he shall tell a tale, by my faith,	For he shal telle a tale, by my fey,
Make him come forth, he knows his penance;	Do hym come forth, he knoweth his penaunce;
Is that a cook of London, with bad luck (to him)?	Is that a cook of Londoun, with meschaunce?
That he will soon fall from his horse!	That he wol falle fro his hors atones!
See how he naps! See how, for cock's bones,	See how he nappeth! See how, for cokkes bones,
That will awake our fellow far behind us?	That wole awake oure felawe al bihynde?
Is there no man, for prayer nor for hire,	Is ther no man, for preyere ne for hyre,
And said, "Sirs, what! Dun is in the mire!	And seyde, "Sires, what! Dun is in the myre!
There began our Host to joke and play,	Ther gan oure Hooste for to jape and pleye,
Under the Blee, in Canterbury Way?	Under the Blee, in Caunterbury Weye?
Which is called Bobbe-up-and-down,	Which that ycleped is Bobbe-up-and-doun,
Know you not where there stands a little town	Woot ye nat where ther stant a litel toun
Here follows the prologue of the Maniciple's Tale.	Here folweth the Prologe of the Maunciples Tale.
There is but little Latin in my maw!"	Ther is but litel Latyn in my mawe!"
But it shall not be of philosophy,	But it schal not ben of philosophie,
That I shall awaken all this company.	That I schal waken al this compaignie.
And I shall clink you so merry a bell,	And I schal clynken you so mery a belle,
My handsome body shall tell a tale,	My joly body schal a tale telle,
And therefore, Host, I warn thee beforehand,	And therfore, Hoost, I warne thee biforn,
Or sprinkle weeds in our clean grain.	Or springen cokkel in our clene corn.
"He would sow some difficulty,	"He wolde sowen som difficulte,
We all believe in the great God," said he;	We leven alle in the grete God," quod he;
He shall no gospel interpret here nor teach.	He schal no gospel glosen here ne teche.
"Nay, by my father's soul, that shall he not!"	"Nay, by my fader soule, that schal he nat!"
This Lollard here will preach us something."	This Lollere heer wil prechen us somwhat."
For we shall have a sermon;	For we schal han a predicacioun;
Wait, for God's worthy passion,	Abydeth, for Goddes digne passioun,
"Now! good men," said our Host, "listen to me;	"Now! goode men," quod oure Hoste, "herkeneth me;
I smell a Lollard in the wind," said he.	I smelle a Lollere in the wynd," quod he.
Our Host answered, "O Jankin, are you there?	Oure Host answerde, "O Jankin, be ye there?
What ails the man, so sinfully to swear?"	What eyleth the man, so synfully to swere?"
The Parson him answered, "Bless me!	The Parson him answerde, "Benedicite!
I see well that you men learned in lore	I se wel that ye lerned men in lore
Tell us a tale, as was thy previous agreement.	Telle us a tale, as was thi forward yore.
Sir Parish Priest," said he, "for God's bones,	Sir Parisshe Prest," quod he, "for Goddes bones,
This was a excellent tale for this occasion!	This was a thrifty tale for the nones!
And said, "Good men, listen every one!	And seyde, "Goode men, herkeneth everych on!
[Our Host upon his stirrups stood up at once,	[Owre Hoost upon his stiropes stood anon,
Here ends the tale of the Man of Law.	Heere endeth the tale of the Man of Lawe
And keep us all that are in this place! Amen	And kepe us alle that been in this place! Amen
Joy after woe, govern us in his grace,	Joye after wo, governe us in his grace,
And fare now well! my tale is at an end.	And fareth now weel! my tale is at an ende.
Until death departs them, this life they lead.	Til deeth departeth hem, this lyf they lede.
They all live, and never parted;	They lyven alle, and nevere asonder wende;
In virtue and in holy charitable works	In vertu and in hooly almus-dede
She praises God a hundred thousand times.	She heryeth God an hundred thousand sithe.
Weeping for tenderness blithe in heart,	Wepynge for tendrenesse in herte blithe,
Down on her knees falls she to ground;	Doun on hir knees falleth she to grounde;
And when she her father has found,	And whan that she hir fader hath yfounde,
Now has she escaped all her adventure.	Now is she scaped al hire aventure.
To Rome has come this holy creature,	To Rome is come this hooly creature,
Toward the town of Rome goes her way.	Toward the toun of Rome goth hir weye.
And Lady Custance, finally to say,	And dame Custance, finally to seye,
Now let us pray God his soul be blessed!	Now lat us prayen God his soule blesse!
For whom Custance has full great sadness.	For whom Custance hath ful greet hevynesse.
Out of this world this king Alla he seized,	Out of this world this kyng Alla he hente,
When passed was a year, as I suppose,	Whan passed was a yeer, evene as I gesse,
For Death, that takes of high ranking and low his payment,	For Deeth, that taketh of heigh and logh his rente,
Lasts the bliss of Alla with Custance.	Lasteth the blisse of Alla with Custance.
I make this statement only for this conclusion,	I ne seye but for this ende this sentence,
Envy, or pride, or passion, or offence?	Envye, or pride, or passion, or offence?
Or anger, or desire, or some kind of fear,	Or ire, or talent, or som kynnes affray,
That he was not moved by either conscience,	That hym ne moeved outher conscience,
Who lived ever in such delight one day	Who lyved euere in swich delit o day
From day to night it changes like the tide.	Fro day to nyght it changeth as the tyde.
Joy of this world, because time will not stand still;	Joye of this world, for tyme wol nat abyde;
But little while it lasts, I you promise,	But litel while it lasteth, I yow heete,
Where they live in joy and in quiet.	Wher as they lyve in joye and in quiete.
With his Custance, his holy wife so sweet,	With his Custance, his hooly wyf so sweete,
This king Alla, when he his time saw,	This kyng Alla, whan he his tyme say,
Maurice's life; I bear it not in mind.	Maurices lyf; I bere it noght in mynde.
In the old Roman histories may men find	In the olde Romayn geestes may men fynde
Of Custance is my tale in particular.	Of Custance is my tale specially.
But I let all his story pass by;	But I lete al his storie passen by;
To Christ's church he did great honor.	To Cristes chirche he dide greet honour.
Made by the Pope, and lived in a Christian manner;	Maad by the Pope, and lyved cristenly;
This child Maurice was later Emperor	This child Maurice was sithen Emperour
In joy and bliss at their meal I let them remain	In joye and blisse at mete I lete hem dwelle
This glad folk to dinner they themselves set;	This glade folk to dyner they hem sette;
The day goes fast, I will no longer delay.	The day goth faste, I wol no lenger lette.
But of my tale I shall make an end;	But of my tale make an ende I shal;
Between them three, since they are thus met?	Bitwixe hem thre, syn they been thus ymette?
Who can tell all the pitiful joy	Who kan the pitous joye tellen al
But thank my lord here of his kindnesses."	But thonketh my lord heere of his kyndenesse."
Send me no more unto any heathen country,	Sende me namoore unto noon hethenesse,
Now, good father, mercy I beg of you!	Now, goode fader, mercy I yow crye!
It am I, father, that in the salt sea	It am I, fader, that in the salte see
"Whom long ago you have sent unto Syria.	"That whilom ye han sent unto Surrye.
"I am your daughter Custance," said she,	"I am youre doghter Custance," quod she,
Is now completely out of your remembrance.	Is now ful clene out of youre remembrance.
"Father," said she, "your young child Custance	"Fader," quod she, "youre yonge child Custance
She dismounted, and falls to his feet.	She lighte doun, and falleth hym to feete.
And when she saw her father in the street,	And whan she saugh hir fader in the strete,
And forth they ride in joy and in gladness.	And forth they ryde in joye and in gladnesse.
And also his wife, to meet this Emperor;	And eek his wyf, this Emperour to meete;
So far as his ability may suffice.	As ferforth as his konnyng may suffise.
Prepared for this feast in every way	Arrayed for this feste in every wise
Alla goes to his inn, and as he should,	Alla goth to his in, and as hym oghte,
Upon this child, and thought about his daughter.	Upon this child, and on his doghter thoghte.
And well read I (in my source) he looked intently	And wel rede I he looked bisily
To come to dinner, as he him requested;	To come to dyner, as he hym bisoughte;
This Emperor has agreed nobly	This Emperour hath graunted gentilly
He went himself, and that would be most fitting.	He wente hymself, and so it may wel seeme.
To have sent any child, but it is better to believe	Sente any child, but it is bet to deeme
To him that was of such high honor	To hym that was of so sovereyn honour
But, as I guess, Alla was not so foolish	But, as I gesse, Alla was nat so nyce
Takes this message unto this Emperor;	Dooth this message unto this Emperour;
Some men would say that the child Maurice	Som men wolde seyn how that the child Maurice
Unto her father say any word of her.	Unto hir fader no word of hire seye.
She prayed him also he should by no means	She preyde hym eek he sholde by no weye
To grant some day with him to dine.	To vouche sauf som day with hym to dyne.
That of his majesty he would incline	That of his magestee he wolde enclyne
That he would pray her father specially	That he wolde preye hir fader specially
Then prayed she her husband meekly,	Tho preyde she hir housbonde mekely,
Has seen or shall (see), while the world may endure.	Hath seyn or shal, whil that the world may dure.
There is none like it that any creature	Ther is noon lyk that any creature
That, except for the joy that lasts evermore,	That, save the joye that lasteth everemo,
And such a bliss is there between them two	And swich a blisse is ther bitwix hem two
I believe a hundred times they have kissed,	I trowe an hundred tymes been they kist,
That Alla was guiltless of her woe,	That Alla giltelees was of hir wo,
But finally, when the truth is known	But finally, whan that the sothe is wist
I am so weary from speaking of sorrow.	I am so wery for to speke of sorwe.
I pray you to release me from all my labor;	I pray yow alle my labour to relesse;
Through which lamentations began their woe to increase.	Thurgh whiche pleintes gan hir wo encresse.
Great was the pity to hear them lament,	Greet was the pitee for to heere hem pleyne,
Before their woeful hearts might cease (giving pain);	Er that hir woful hertes myghte cesse;
Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain,	Long was the sobbyng and the bitter peyne,
Otherwise (may) the fiend me fetch out of this place!"	Elles the feend me fecche out of this place!"
As is Maurice my son, whose face is so like yours;	As is Maurice my sone, so lyk youre face;
(I swear) that of your harm I am as guiltless	That of youre harm as giltelees am I
As surely as they may have mercy on my soul,	So wisly on my soule as have mercy,
He wept, and himself excuses piteously.	He weep, and hym excuseth pitously.
Twice she swooned in his own sight;	Twyes she swowned in his owene sighte;
When she remembered his unnatural cruelty.	Whan she remembred his unkyndenesse.
So was her heart shut (pressed by emotion) in her distress,	So was hir herte shet in hir distresse,
And she, for sorrow, stands as dumb as a tree,	And she, for sorwe, as doumb stant as a tree,
He knew well indeed that it was she.	He knew wel verraily that it was she.
For at the first look he on her set	For at the firste look he on hire sette
And wept that it was a pity to see;	And weep that it was routhe for to see;
When Alla saw his wife, gently he greeted her,	Whan Alla saugh his wyf, faire he hire grette,
When she knew the reason for that summons;	Whan that she wiste wherfore was that sonde;
But trust well, she did not want to dance	But trusteth weel, hire liste nat to daunce
And hastily he sent after Custance.	And hastifly he sente after Custaunce.
This senator does Alla great honor,	This senatour dooth Alla greet honour,
Goes Alla, to see this wonderful happening.	Goth Alla, for to seen this wonder chaunce.
And after noon, home with the senator	And after noon, hoom with the senatour
To my country from thence that she went?"	To my contree fro thennes that she wente?"
My wife by sea, as well as he her sent	My wyf by see, as wel as he hire sente
"What know I if Christ has hither sent	"What woot I if that Crist have hyder ysent
That in the salt sea my wife is dead."	That in the salte see my wyf is deed."
I ought to believe, by reasonable judgment,	I oghte deme, of skilful juggement,
"In faith," thought he, "hallucination is in my head!	"Parfay," thoghte he, "fantome is in myn heed!
And sped himself from the table as fast as he could.	And spedde hym fro the table that he myghte.
Who is his wife, and secretly he sighed,	That is his wyf, and pryvely he sighte,
If the child's mother were in any way she	If that the childes mooder were aught she
Of Lady Custance, and thereon mused he	Of dame Custance, and ther on mused he
This Alla has the face in remembrance	This Alla hath the face in remembrance
As it is possible for a creature to be.	As possible is a creature to be.
There is no man could bring her to that point."	There is no man koude brynge hire to that prikke."
Through her breast, than be a woman wicked;	Thurghout hir brest, than ben a womman wikke;
I dare well say she had rather have a knife	I dar wel seyn hir hadde levere a knyf
Of worldly women, maiden, nor of wife.	Of worldly wommen, mayde, ne of wyf.
Saw I never as she, nor heard of more,	Ne saugh I nevere as she, ne herde of mo,
"So virtuous a liver in my life	"So vertuous a lyvere in my lyf
"But God knows," said this senator also,	"But God woot," quod this senatour also,
He told Alla how this child was found.	He tolde Alla how that this child was founde.
That I know of" -- and shortly, in a little while,	That I of woot" -- and shortly, in a stounde,
"I do not know," said he, "by God, and by Saint John!	"I noot," quod he, "by God, and by Seint John!
"Whose is that fair child that stands yonder?"	"Whos is that faire child that stondeth yonder?"
And to the senator he said at once,	And to the senatour he seyde anon,
This king Alla has of this child great wonder,	This Alla kyng hath of this child greet wonder,
The child stood, looking in the king's face.	The child stood, lookynge in the kynges face.
Before Alla, during the meal time,	Biforn Alla, durynge the metes space,
But the truth is this, that at his mother's command	But sooth is this, that at his moodres heeste
Be as be may, there he was at the least.	Be as be may, ther was he at the leeste.
I can not tell every detail --	I may nat tellen every circumstance --
Some men would say at request of Custance	Som men wolde seyn at requeste of Custance
Custance's son went in his company.	Custances sone wente in his compaignye.
To feast, and shortly, if I shall not lie,	To feste, and shortly, if I shal nat lye,
This senator is to king Alla gone	This senatour is to kyng Alla go
And so it happened that in a day or two	And so bifel that in a day or two
Every one of them does the other great honor.	Everich of hem dooth oother greet honour.
To king Alla, and he to him also;	To kyng Alla, and he to hym also;
Great friendliness shows this noble senator	Greet cheere dooth this noble senatour
As to do any king a reverence.	As to doon any kyng a reverence.
Rode to meet him, and many of his lineage,	Rood hym agayns, and many of his lynage,
For which the senator, as was the custom,	For which the senatour, as was usage,
By arrangers of lodging that went before him;	By herbergeours that wenten hym biforn;
How Alla king shall come in pilgrimage,	How Alla kyng shal comen in pilgrymage,
The news at once through Rome town is carried,	The fame anon thurgh Rome toun is born,
To forgive his wicked deeds that he did.	Foryeve his wikked werkes that he wroghte.
In all things, and Jesus Christ besought	In heigh and logh, and Jhesu Crist bisoghte
And put him in the Pope's governance	And putte hym in the Popes ordinance
To Rome he comes to receive his penance;	To Rome he comth to receyven his penance;
Upon a day fell in such repentance	Upon a day fil in swich repentance
King Alla, who had his mother slain,	Kyng Alla, which that hadde his mooder slayn,
Under the senator's governance.	Under the senatoures governance.
I will return, and I will leave Custance	I wol retourne, and lete I wol Custance
Who for his wife weeps and sighs sore,	That for his wyf wepeth and siketh soore,
But to king Alla, whom I spoke of formerly,	But to kyng Alla, which I spak of yoore,
I will no longer tarry in this case,	I wol no lenger tarien in this cas,
But for all that she knew her never the more.	But for al that she knew hire never the moore.
The senator's wife was her aunt,	The senatoures wyf hir aunte was,
And long time dwelled she in that place,	And longe tyme dwelled she in that place,
Woeful Custance, and many another more.	Woful Custance, and many another mo.
Thus can Our Lady bring out of woe	Thus kan Oure Lady bryngen out of wo
And with the senator she led her life.	And with the senatour she ladde hir lyf.
He gave her, and her young son also;	He yaf hire, and hir yonge sone also;
He brings her to Rome, and to his wife	He bryngeth hire to Rome, and to his wyf
Of her rank, although she should die.	Of hire estaat, althogh she sholde deye.
She was in such a state, she will not tell	She was in swich array, ne she nyl seye
In no way knew he who she was, nor why	Nothyng ne knew he what she was, ne why
And met the ship sailing, as says the story,	And mette the ship dryvynge, as seith the storie,
Toward Rome, sailing full royally,	To Rome-ward, saillynge ful roially,
This senator goes with victory	This senatour repaireth with victorie
Homeward to Rome they prepared themselves to wend.	Homward to Rome they shapen hem to wende.
Full many a day; but shortly -- this is the end --	Ful many a day; but shortly -- this is th' ende --
They burn, slay, and bring them to misery	They brennen, sleen, and brynge hem to meschance
On Syrians to take great vengeance.	On Surryens to taken heigh vengeance.
And other lords, God knows, many a one,	And othere lordes, God woot, many oon,
His senator, with royal armaments,	His senatour, with roial ordinance,
That at the feast caused to be slain both high ranking and low.	That at the feeste leet sleen bothe moore and lesse.
I mean the cursed wicked Sultaness	I mene the cursed wikked Sowdanesse
Done to his daughter by a false traitor,	Doon to his doghter by a fals traytour,
The slaughter of Christian folk, and dishonor	The slaughtre of cristen folk, and dishonour
That out of Syria has by letters known	That out of Surrye hath by lettres knowe
And speak we of the Roman Emperor,	And speke we of the Romayn Emperour,
Now let us stint of Custance but a short while,	Now lat us stynte of Custance but a throwe,
To make an end of all her sadness.	To make an ende of al hir hevynesse.
Has devised a plan, through her endless goodness,	Hath shapen, thurgh hir endelees goodnesse,
And sometimes east, full many a weary day,	And somtyme est, ful many a wery day,
Sometimes west, and sometimes north and south,	Somtyme west, and somtyme north and south,
Of Gibraltar and Morocco, driving ever	Of Jubaltare and Septe, dryvynge ay
Forth goes her ship throughout the narrow mouth	Forth gooth hir ship thurghout the narwe mouth
So sent he might and vigor to Custance.	So sente he myght and vigour to Custance.
To them and saved them out of misfortune,	To hem and saved hem out of meschance,
That just as God the spirit of vigor sent	That right as God spirit of vigour sente
The people of God? I say, for this purpose,	The peple of God? I seye, for this entente,
And to deliver out of wretchedness	And to deliveren out of wrecchednesse
Who gave Judith courage or hardiness	Who yaf Judith corage or hardynesse
Well may men see, it was nothing but God's grace.	Wel may men seen, it nas but Goddes grace.
How dared he look upon thy dreadful face?	Hou dorste he looke upon thy dredful face?
So young and so lacking in arms and armor?	So yong and of armure so desolaat?
How could David make thee so defeated,	Hou myghte David make thee so maat,
O Goliath, immeasurable of height,	O Golias, unmesurable of lengthe,
Herself to defend against this renegade?	Hire to defende agayn this renegat?
How may this weak woman have this strength	How may this wayke womman han this strengthe
To do this sin, are either slain or destroyed!	To doon this synne, been outher slayn or shente!
Is lamentation. How many a one may men find	Is compleynyng. Hou many oon may men fynde
The end of thy work, or of thy blind desires,	Th' ende of thy werk, or of thy lustes blynde,
But truly thou wilt his body destroy.	But verraily thou wolt his body shende.
Not only that thou make man's mind grow faint,	Nat oonly that thou feyntest mannes mynde,
O foul lust of lechery, lo, thy end!	O foule lust of luxurie, lo, thyn ende!
And thus has Christ kept Custance undefiled.	And thus hath Crist unwemmed kept Custance.
And in the sea he drowned as a punishment;	And in the see he dreynte for vengeance;
The thief fell over board all suddenly,	The theef fil over bord al sodeynly,
For with her struggling well and mightily	For with hir struglyng wel and myghtily
Her child cried, and she cried pitifully.	Hir child cride, and she cride pitously.
Woebegone then was this wretched woman;	Wo was this wrecched womman tho bigon;
Her lover be, whether she would or would not.	Hir lemman be, wher-so she wolde or nolde.
Came into ship alone, and said he should	Cam into ship allone, and seyde he sholde
A thief, that had renounced our religion,	A theef, that hadde reneyed oure creance,
The lord's steward -- God give him bad luck! --	The lordes styward -- God yeve hym meschance! --
But shortly, from the castle, on a night,	But shortly, from the castel, on a nyght,
To stare on this ship and on Custance.	To gauren on this ship and on Custance.
Down from the castle comes there many a person	Doun fro the castel comth ther many a wight
Who fallen is in heathen hand once more,	That fallen is in hethen hand eft soone,
Have for Custance and for her child some thought,	Have on Custance and on hir child som mynde,
Almighty God, that saves all mankind,	Almyghty God, that saveth al mankynde,
Custance, and also her child, the sea up cast.	Custance, and eek hir child, the see up caste.
Of which the name in my text I do not find,	Of which the name in my text noght I fynde,
Alongside a heathen castle, at the last,	Under an hethen castel, atte laste,
Before her ship approached unto land.	Er that hir ship approched unto londe.
Five years and more, as it pleased Christ's dispensation,	Fyve yeer and moore, as liked Cristes sonde,
Who floats in the sea, in pain and woe,	That fleteth in the see, in peyne and wo,
There is no tongue that it can tell.	Ther is no tonge that it telle may.
Makes for his wife, and for his child also,	Maketh for his wyf, and for his child also,
The sorrow that this Alla night and day	The sorwe that this Alla nyght and day
Thus ends old Donegild, with bad luck to her!	Thus endeth olde Donegild, with meschance!
Because she traitor was to her allegiance.	For that she traitour was to hire ligeance.
His mother slew -- that may men plainly read --	His mooder slow -- that may men pleynly rede --
The effect is this: that Alla, without doubt,	Th' effect is this: that Alla, out of drede,
But in what manner (this was done), certainly, I know not.	But in what wise, certeinly, I noot.
And all the venom of this cursed deed,	And al the venym of this cursed dede,
Deduced was by whom this harm did spring.	Ymagined was by whom this harm gan sprynge.
And thus, by wit and subtle questioning,	And thus, by wit and sotil enquerynge,
From night to night, in what place he had lain;	Fro nyght to nyght, in what place he had leyn;
Had to reveal and tell, bluntly and plainly,	Moste biknowe and tellen, plat and pleyn,
This messenger tortured was until he	This messager tormented was til he
Upon pain of death, so have I done, certainly."	Up peyne of deeth, so have I doon, certein."
And said, "Lord, as you commanded me	And seyde, "Lord, as ye comanded me
And shows the king his seal and also his letter,	And sheweth the kyng his seel and eek his lettre,
As you have heard -- I can tell it no better --	As ye han herd -- I kan telle it no bettre --
The constable began about his heart to grow cold,	The constable gan aboute his herte colde,
And asks where his wife and his child is.	And asketh where his wyf and his child is.
Unto his castle, of the which I told,	Unto his castel, of which I tolde,
Alla the king comes home soon after this	Alla the kyng comth hoom soone after this
But in the sea she drives forth on her way.	But in the see she dryveth forth hir weye.
And bring her home! I can no better say,	And brynge hire hoom! I kan no bettre seye,
For wind and weather almighty God provide,	For wynd and weder almyghty God purchace,
She had enough -- praised be God's grace!	She hadde ynogh -- heryed be Goddes grace!
And other necessities that should be needed	And othere necessaries that sholde nede
Supplied with food was the ship, it is no doubt,	Vitailled was the ship, it is no drede,
She blesses herself, and into the ship she went.	She blisseth hire, and into ship she wente.
And takes her leave, and with a holy attitude	And taketh hir leve, and with an hooly entente
And ever she prays her child to hold his peace;	And evere she preyeth hire child to holde his pees;
Toward the ship -- all the crowd follows her --	Toward the ship -- hir folweth al the prees --
And up she rises, and walks down the strand	And up she rist, and walketh doun the stronde
And said, "Farewell, ruthless husband!"	And seyde, "Farewel, housbonde routhelees!"
Therewith she looked backward to the land,	Therwith she looked bakward to the londe,
Kiss him once in his father's name!"	So kys hym ones in his fadres name!"
"Let my little child remain here with thee;	"As lat my litel child dwelle heer with thee;
O mercy, dear constable," said she,	O mercy, deere constable," quod she,
Why will thy hard father have thee killed?	Why wil thyn harde fader han thee spilt?
That never did sin as yet, in faith?	That nevere wroghtest synne as yet, pardee?
"O little child, alas! What is thy guilt,	"O litel child, allas! What is thy gilt,
Takes pity on every wretched person in distress.	Rewest on every reweful in distresse.
Have pity on my child, (thou who) of thy nobility	Rewe on my child, that of thy gentillesse
Thou haven of refuge, bright star of day,	Thow haven of refut, brighte sterre of day,
Thou glory of womanhood, thou fair maiden,	Thow glorie of wommanhede, thow faire may,
And yet now lives my little child, in faith!	And yet now lyveth my litel child, parfay!
"Thou saw thy child slain before thy eyes,	"Thow sawe thy child yslayn bifore thyne yen,
Thy woe and any woe man may sustain.	Thy wo and any wo man may sustene.
Then is there no comparison between	Thanne is ther no comparison bitwene
Thy blissful eyes saw all his torment;	Thy blisful eyen sawe al his torment;
For which thy child was on a cross stretched.	For which thy child was on a croys yrent.
Mankind was lost, and damned forever to die,	Mankynde was lorn, and damned ay to dye,
True it is that through woman's instigation	Sooth is that thurgh wommanes eggement
"Mother," said she, "and maiden bright, Mary,	"Mooder," quod she, "and mayde bright, Marie,
And in her arm she lulls it fast asleep,	And in hir arm she lulleth it ful faste,
And over his little eyes she it laid,	And over his litel eyen she it leyde,
With that her kerchief off her head she pulled,	With that hir coverchief of hir heed she breyde,
"Peace, little son, I will do thee no harm."	"Pees, litel sone, I wol do thee noon harm."
And kneeling, pitifully to him she said,	And knelynge, pitously to hym she seyde,
Her little child lay weeping in her arm,	Hir litel child lay wepyng in hir arm,
Who is to me my sail and also my rudder."	That is to me my seyl and eek my steere."
In Him trust I, and in his mother dear,	In hym triste I, and in his mooder deere,
As strong as ever He was, He is yet now.	As strong as evere he was, he is yet now.
He can keep me from harm and also from shame	He kan me kepe from harm and eek fro shame
While I was on the land amongst you,	While I was on the lond amonges yow,
"He that me kept from the false blame	"He that me kepte fro the false blame
She said, "Lord, always welcome be thy dispensation!	She seyde, "Lord, ay welcome be thy sonde!
The will of Christ, and kneeling on the strand,	The wyl of Crist, and knelynge on the stronde,
But nonetheless she takes in good faith	But nathelees she taketh in good entente
The fourth day toward her ship she went.	The ferthe day toward hir ship she wente.
And Custance, with a deadly pale face,	And Custance, with a deedly pale face,
When the king this cursed letter sent,	Whan that the kyng this cursed lettre sente,
In a shameful death; there is no other way."	On shames deeth; ther is noon oother weye."
That I must be thy tormentor, or die	That I moot be thy tormentour, or deye
O good Custance, alas, so woeful am I	O goode Custance, allas, so wo is me
And wicked folk to reign in prosperity?	And wikked folk regne in prosperitee?
That thou wilt allow innocents to die,	That thou wolt suffren innocentz to spille,
Since thou art rightful judge, how may it be	Sith thou art rightful juge, how may it be
"O mighty God, if it be thy will,	"O myghty God, if that it be thy wille,
So full of sin is so many a creature?	So ful of synne is many a creature?
"Lord Christ," said he, "how can this world endure,	"Lord Crist," quod he, "how may this world endure,
And when that he this pitiful letter saw,	And whan that he this pitous lettre say,
And to the constable he gave the letter;	And to the constable he the lettre took;
Unto the castle goes the nearest way,	Unto the castel halt the nexte way,
This messenger in the morning, when he awoke,	This messager on morwe, whan he wook,
When Donegild devised all this plan.	Whan Donegild cast al this ordinance.
And, sleeping, in thy dream to be in suffering,	And, slepynge, in thy dreem been in penance,
O my Custance, well may thy spirit have fear,	O my Custance, wel may thy goost have feere,
And command her that she never again come here."	And charge hire that she never eft coome theere."
He should put, and push her from the land,	He sholde putte, and croude hire fro the lond,
"But in the same ship as he her found,	"But in the same ship as he hire fond,
Three days and a quarter of duration of a tide (three hours);	Thre dayes and o quarter of a tyde;
Custance within his realm to remain	Custance in-with his reawme for t' abyde
That he should not allow in any manner	That he ne sholde suffren in no wyse
Upon pain of hanging, and of strict judicial punishment,	Up peyne of hangyng, and on heigh juyse,
"The king commands his constable at once,	"The king comandeth his constable anon,
And counterfeited letters in this manner:	And countrefeted lettres in this wyse:
Again were his letters stolen every one,	Eft were his lettres stolen everychon,
All night, until the sun did arise.	Al nyght, til the sonne gan aryse.
He drank, and well stuffed (drink) under his belt;	He drank, and wel his girdel underpighte;
And (she) pleased him in all that ever she could.	And plesed hym in al that ever she myghte.
And she was very happy because of this messenger,	And she was of this messager ful fayn,
And at the king's mother's court he dismounted,	And at the kynges moodres court he lighte,
This messenger comes from the king again,	This messager comth fro the kyng agayn,
Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell!	Thogh thou heere walke, thy spirit is in helle!
Fie, like a fiendish spirit, for I dare well tell,	Fy, feendlych spirit, for I dar wel telle,
Fie, like a man, fie! -- o nay, by God, I lie --	Fy, mannysh, fy! -- o nay, by God, I lye --
Let him write about thy treachery!	Lat hym enditen of thy traitorie!
Unto thy malice and thy tyranny!	Unto thy malice and thy tirannye!
O Donegild, I do not have any English suitable (to describe)	O Donegild, I ne have noon Englissh digne
There is no secret hidden, without doubt.	Ther is no conseil hyd, withouten doute.
Where drunkenness reigns in any group,	Ther dronkenesse regneth in any route,
Thy face is completely changed.	Thy face is turned in a newe array.
Thy mind is lost, thou chatter like a jay,	Thy mynde is lorn, thou janglest as a jay,
And thou betray all secrets.	And thou biwreyest alle secreenesse.
Strong is thy breath, thy limbs ever tremble,	Strong is thy breeth, thy lymes faltren ay,
O messenger, filled with drunkenness,	O messager, fulfild of dronkenesse,
Which to the messenger was given soon,	Which to the messager was take soone,
This letter he seals, secretly weeping,	This lettre he seleth, pryvely wepynge,
Moore agreeable than this to my desire."	Moore agreable than this to my likynge."
Christ, when He pleases, may send me an heir	Crist, whan hym list, may sende me an heir
And also my wife, until my home-coming.	And eek my wyf, unto myn hoom-comynge.
"Guard this child, whether it be foul or fair,	"Kepeth this child, al be it foul or feir,
I put all my will in thy governance.	My lust I putte al in thyn ordinaunce.
Lord, welcome be thy desire and thy pleasure;	Lord, welcome be thy lust and thy plesaunce;
To me that am now learned in his teaching!	To me that am now lerned in his loore!
But by his own hand he wrote in answer,	But of his owene hand he wroot agayn,
But to no person he told his painful sorrows,	But to no wight he tolde his sorwes soore,
Woe was this king when he this letter had seen,	Wo was this kyng whan he this lettre had sayn,
And every person hates her company.	And every wight hateth hir compaignye.
Come, by charms or by sorcery,	Ycomen, by charmes or by sorcerie,
The mother was an evil spirit, by chance	The mooder was an elf, by aventure
That for any length of time dared to remain near it.	That any while dorste ther endure.
That in the castle no one was so bold	That in the castel noon so hardy was
Of so horrible a fiendish creature	Of so horrible a feendly creature
From his constable, as you shall after hear.	Fro his constable, as ye shal after heere.
Directed unto the king concerning this matter	Unto the kyng direct of this mateere
Another letter, made full sinfully,	Another lettre, wroght ful synfully,
And counterfeited was full subtly	And countrefeted was ful subtilly
Out of his box, while he slept like a pig;	Out of his box, whil he sleep as a swyn;
And stolen were his letters secretly	And stolen were his lettres pryvely
This messenger drank heavily ale and wine,	This messager drank sadly ale and wyn,
Tomorrow will I say to thee what I wish."	To-morwe wol I seye thee what me leste."
But here all night I want that thou take thy rest.	But heere al nyght I wol thou take thy reste.
I am at your service, both night and day."	I am youre servant, bothe nyght and day."
If you will (send) anything unto your son the king,	If ye wol aught unto youre sone the kyng,
That I must bear with all the haste I can.	That I moot bere with al the haste I may.
"Lo, here (are) the letters sealed of this business,	"Lo, heere the lettres seled of this thyng,
As a joy and bliss to all this reign about.	To joye and blisse to al this regne aboute.
My lady queen has a child, without doubt,	My lady queene hath child, withouten doute,
And thank God a hundred thousand times!	And thanketh God an hundred thousand sithe!
"Madame," said he, "you may be glad and happy,	"Madame," quod he, "ye may be glad and blithe,
And salutes her full fair in his language:	And salueth hire ful faire in his langage:
This messenger, to do (something for) his profit,	This messager, to doon his avantage,
He takes the letter, and forth he goes his way.	He taketh the lettre, and forth he gooth his weye.
And other tidings useful to be said.	And othere tidynges spedeful for to seye.
How this blissful event has occurred,	How that this blisful tidyng is bifalle,
And wrote unto his king, who was called Alla,	And wroot unto his kyng, that cleped was Alle,
This constable orders a messenger to come forth,	This constable dooth forth come a messageer,
Mauricius at the baptismal font they call him.	Mauricius at the fontstoon they hym calle.
The time is come a male child she bore;	The tyme is come a knave child she beer;
She keeps to her chamber, abiding Christ's will.	She halt hire chambre, abidyng Cristes wille.
Now fair Custance, who is so humble and meek,	Now faire Custance, that is so humble and meke,
Toward Scotland, his foemen to seek.	To Scotlond-ward, his foomen for to seke.
He gave his wife to protect, when he is gone	He took his wyf to kepe, whan he is gon
And to a bishop, and his constable also,	And to a bisshop, and his constable eke,
On her he begot a male child quickly,	On hire he gat a knave child anon,
As for the time being -- it can be no better.	As for the tyme -- it may no bet bitide.
And (they must) lay their holiness aside a little while,	And leye a lite hir hoolynesse aside,
To folk that have wedded them with rings,	To folk that han ywedded hem with rynges,
Such sorts of necessary acts as are pleasing	Swiche manere necessaries as been plesynges
For though wives are full holy things,	For thogh that wyves be ful hooly thynges,
They go to bed, as it was reasonable and right;	They goon to bedde, as it was skile and right;
They eat, and drink, and dance, and sing, and play.	They ete, and drynke, and daunce, and synge, and pleye.
The fruit (the essential part) of every tale is to be told:	The fruyt of every tale is for to seye:
Who blows in a trumpet or in a horn?	Who bloweth in a trumpe or in an horn?
At the marriage, or which course goes before;	At mariage, or which cours goth biforn;
Why should I tell of the royalty	What sholde I tellen of the roialtee
To make so long a tale as of the grain (the essential part).	Maken so long a tale as of the corn.
I do not want of the chaff, nor of the straw,	Me list nat of the chaf, ne of the stree,
She thought it an insult that he should take	Hir thoughte a despit that he sholde take
She wished that her son had not done so;	She wolde noght hir sone had do so;
She thought her cursed heart broke in two.	Hir thoughte hir cursed herte brast atwo.
The king's mother, full of tyranny?	The kynges mooder, ful of tirannye?
Of this wedding but Donegild, and no others,	Of this weddyng but Donegild, and namo,
But who was woeful, if I shall not lie,	But who was woful, if I shal nat lye,
And thus has Christ made Custance a queen.	And thus hath Crist ymaad Custance a queene.
This holy maiden, that is so bright and beautiful;	This hooly mayden, that is so bright and sheene;
Made Alla wed full solemnly	Made Alla wedden ful solempnely
And yet Custance had for his death great pity.	And yet Custance hadde of his deeth greet routhe.
By judgment of Alla immediately;	By juggement of Alla hastifly;
This false knight was slain for his untruth	This false knyght was slayn for his untrouthe
Converted was, thanked be Christ's grace!	Converted was, thanked be Cristes grace!
The king -- and many another in that place --	The kyng -- and many another in that place --
And by Custance's mediation,	And by Custances mediacioun,
And because of this miracle, in conclusion,	And for this miracle, in conclusioun,
Of this blessed innocent, Custance;	Upon this sely innocent, Custance;
Of them that had a wrong suspicion	Of hem that hadden wrong suspecioun
For fear of vengeance, except for Custance alone.	For drede of wreche, save Custance allone.
Like bewildered folk they stood each one,	As mazed folk they stoden everichone,
Of this marvel terrified was all the crowd of people;	Of this mervaille agast was al the prees;
Thus hast thou done, and yet I hold my peace!"	Thus hastou doon, and yet holde I my pees!"
The daughter of holy church in the presence of the High One (God);	The doghter of hooly chirche in heigh presence;
And it said, "Thou hast slandered, guiltless,	And seyde, "Thou hast desclaundred, giltelees,
A voice was heard by everyone there,	A voys was herd in general audience,
In sight of every body in that place.	In sighte of every body in that place.
And both his eyes burst out of his face	And bothe his eyen broste out of his face
A hand struck him upon the neck-boon,	An hand hym smoot upon the nekke-boon,
That she was guilty, and in the same moment	She gilty was, and in the meene whiles
Was fetched, and on this book he swore at once	Was fet, and on this book he swoor anoon
A British book, in which were written the gospels,	A Britoun book, written with Evaungiles,
Whom we desire to be our judge (i.e., bring her to trial)."	Whom that we wole that shal been oure justise."
Slew this woman, then will we think carefully about	This womman slow, yet wol we us avyse
"And if this knight will swear how that she	"And if this knyght wol sweren how that she
"Now hastily have a book fetched," said he,	"Now hastily do fecche a book," quod he,
That from his eyes ran the water down.	That from his eyen ran the water doun.
This king Alla has such compassion,	This Alla kyng hath swich compassioun,
Far away are thy friends at thy great need!	Fer been thy freendes at thy grete nede!
O blood royal, that stands in this dreadful state,	O blood roial, that stondest in this drede,
She has no person to whom to lament (plead for help).	She hath no wight to whom to make hir mone.
An Emperor's daughter stands alone;	An Emperoures doghter stant allone;
Have some pity on her adversity!	Haveth som routhe on hire adversitee!
Duchesses, and you ladies each one,	Duchesses, and ye ladyes everichone,
O queens, living in prosperity,	O queenes, lyvynge in prosperitee,
So stands Custance, and looks around her.	So stant Custance, and looketh hire aboute.
Men might know his face that was in trouble	Men myghte knowe his face that was bistad
And such a color in his face has had	And swich a colour in his face hath had
Toward his death, where he got no reprieve,	Toward his deeth, wher as hym gat no grace,
Among a crowd, of him that has been led	Among a prees, of hym that hath be lad
Have you not seen sometime a pale face,	Have ye nat seyn somtyme a pale face,
My succor be, for otherwise I shall dye!"	My socour be, for ellis shal I dye!"
If I be guiltless of this felony,	If I be giltlees of this felonye,
Before whose child angels sing Hosanna,	Bifore whos child angeles synge Osanne,
Mary I mean, daughter to Saint Anne,	Marie I meene, doghter to Seint Anne,
"Immortal God, that savedest Susannah	"Immortal God, that savedest Susanne
She set herself down on knees, and thus she said:	She sette hire doun on knees, and thus she sayde:
Without guilt thou shalt be slain immediately.	Withouten gilt thou shalt be slayn as swithe.
For, unless Christ a clear miracle reveals,	For, but if Crist open myracle kithe,
So be thy strong champion this day!	So be thy stronge champion this day!
And bound Satan (and he yet lies where he lay),	And boond Sathan (and yet lith ther he lay),
But He that died for our redemption,	But he that starf for our redempcioun,
And fight can thou not, alas!	Ne fighte kanstow noght, so weylaway!
Alas! Custance, thou hast no champion,	Allas! Custance, thou hast no champioun,
By this witness, and thought he would enquire	Of this witnesse, and thoghte he wolde enquere
This gentle king was deeply moved	This gentil kyng hath caught a greet motyf
Except for him who slew Hermengild with his knife.	Save he that Hermengyld slow with his knyf.
Of this bore witness every one in that house,	Of this baar witnesse everich in that hous,
And loving Hermengild as much as her life.	And lovynge Hermengyld right as hir lyf.
For they have seen her always so virtuous,	For they han seyn hire evere so vertuous,
That she had done so great a wickedness,	That she had doon so greet a wikkednesse,
Among the people, and they say they can not imagine	Among the peple, and seyn they kan nat gesse
But nonetheless, there was great mourning	But nathelees, ther was greet moornyng
This false knight, who has this treason wrought,	This false knyght, that hath this tresoun wroght,
So stands this innocent before the king.	So stant this innocent bifore the kyng.
For as the lamb toward its death is brought,	For as the lomb toward his deeth is broght,
Fallen in distress and in misfortune.	Falle in disese and in mysaventure.
When he saw so good a creature	Whan he saugh so benigne a creature
The king's heart for pity trembled,	The kynges herte of pitee gan agryse,
As before this you have heard tell.	As heer-biforn that ye han herd devyse.
That in a ship was found this Custance,	That in a ship was founden this Custance,
And also the time, and where, and in what manner	And eek the tyme, and where, and in what wise
For sheer woe her wit was all away.	For verray wo hir wit was al aweye.
By Lady Custance. Alas, what could she say?	By Dame Custance. Allas, what myghte she seye?
And in the bed the bloody knife he found	And in the bed the blody knyf he fond
For which full often he wept and wrung his hands,	For which ful ofte he weep and wroong his hond,
And saw his wife mercilessly slain,	And saugh his wyf despitously yslayn,
And also Alla, who was king of that land,	And eek Alla, that kyng was of that lond,
Soon after, this constable comes home again,	Soone after cometh this constable hoom agayn,
And went his way, may God give him misfortune!	And wente his wey, ther God yeve hym meschance!
And laid the bloody knife by Lady Custance,	And leyde the blody knyf by dame Custance,
Very quietly has gone to the bed,	Al softely is to the bed ygo,
This knight, through Satan's temptations,	This knyght, thurgh Sathanas temptaciouns,
Sleeps Custance, and Hermengild also.	Slepeth Custance, and Hermengyld also.
Weary, exhausted because of her prayers,	Wery, forwaked in hire orisouns,
In Hermengild's bedroom, while she slept.	In Hermengyldes chambre, whil she slepte.
And secretly one night he crept	And pryvely upon a nyght he crepte
He waits until the constable was away,	He wayteth whan the constable was aweye,
To make her in a shameful death to die.	To maken hire on shameful deeth to deye.
And for malice he plotted in his mind	And for despit he compassed in his thoght
He woos her, but it avails not;	He woweth hire, but it availleth noght;
Unless he might once have his will of her.	But he of hire myghte ones have his wille.
That truly he thought he should die,	That verraily hym thoughte he sholde spille,
Love her so passionately, by foul desire,	Love hire so hoote, of foul affeccioun,
And made a young knight that dwelt in that town	And made a yong knyght that dwelte in that toun
And considered right away how he might repay her,	And caste anon how he myghte quite hir while,
Saw of Custance all her perfection,	Saugh of Custance al hire perfeccioun,
Satan, that ever waits (for a chance) to trick us,	Sathan, that evere us waiteth to bigile,
But I will turn again to my subject.	But turne I wole agayn to my mateere.
Who was full wise, and worthy of his hand (a mighty warrior)	That was ful wys, and worthy of his hond
Under Alla, king of all Northumberland,	Under Alla, kyng of al Northhumbrelond,
But kept it securely many a winter's space of time	But kepte it strongly many a wyntres space
Of which I speak, where he Custance found,	Of which I speke, ther he Custance fond,
This constable was in no way lord of this place	This constable was nothyng lord of this place
Converts, and made him believe in Christ.	Converteth, and on Crist made hym bileve.
That she the constable, before it was evening,	That she the constable, er that it was eve
And so completely she did our religion explain	And so ferforth she gan oure lay declare
That helps folk out of the fiend's snare."	That helpeth folk out of the feendes snare."
And said, "What does all this business mean?"	And seyde, "What amounteth al this fare?"
The constable grew troubled at that sight,	The constable weex abasshed of that sight,
The will of Christ, as daughter of his church.	The wyl of Crist, as doghter of his chirche.
Until Custance made her bold, and told her to work	Til Custance made hire boold, and bad hire wirche
Would have slain her for Jesus Christ's love,	Wolde hire for Jhesu Cristes love han slayn,
Lest that her husband, shortly to say,	Lest that hir housbonde, shortly for to sayn,
This lady grew afraid of these words,	This lady weex affrayed of the soun,
"Dame Hermengild, give me my sight again!"	"Dame Hermengyld, yif me my sighte agayn!"
"In the name of Christ," cried this blind Briton,	"In name of Crist," cride this blinde Britoun,
And in their walk this blind man they met,	And in hir walk this blynde man they mette,
To amuse themselves and to roam to and fro,	To pleyen and to romen to and fro,
Toward the sea an eighth of a mile or two,	Toward the see a furlong wey or two,
And Custance have taken the direct route	And Custance han ytake the righte way
For which the constable and his wife also	For which the constable and his wyf also
Bright was the sun in that summer's day,	Bright was the sonne as in that someres day,
With which men see, after they have become blind.	With whiche men seen, after that they ben blynde.
Unless it were with those eyes of his mind	But it were with thilke eyen of his mynde
The one of them was blind and could not see,	That oon of hem was blynd and myghte nat see,
Honored Christ and deceived the heathen folk,	Honoured Crist and hethen folk bigiled,
That there were not some that in their secrecy	That ther nere somme that in hir privetee
But yet Christian Britons were not so (completely) exiled	But yet nere Cristene Britons so exiled
There was their refuge at that time.	Ther was hir refut for the meene while.
Of old Britons dwelling in this isle;	Of olde Britons dwellynge in this ile;
To Wales fled the Christian people	To Walys fledde the Cristyanytee
The coastal regions of the north, by land and sea.	The plages of the north, by land and see.
Because of pagans, that conquered all about	Thurgh payens, that conquereden al aboute
All Christian folk have fled from that country	Alle Cristen folk been fled fro that contree
Dame Hermengild, wife of the constable of that place.	Dame Hermengyld, constablesse of that place.
Until Jesus has converted through his grace	Til Jhesu hath converted thurgh his grace
In prayers, with many a bitter tear,	In orisons, with many a bitter teere,
And Custance has so long lived there,	And Custance hath so longe sojourned there,
But Hermengild loved her as much as her life,	But Hermengyld loved hire right as hir lyf,
Were pagans, and (so was) that country everywhere;	Were payens, and that contree everywhere;
This constable and Lady Hermengild, his wife,	This constable and dame Hermengyld, his wyf,
That all who look in her face love her.	That alle hir loven that looken in hir face.
To serve and please every one in that place	To serve and plesen everich in that place
And also his wife, that they weep for pity.	And eek his wyf, that they wepen for routhe.
The constable has for her such great pity,	The constable hath of hire so greet pitee,
That she lost her memory, by her pledged word (she swore).	That she forgat hir mynde, by hir trouthe.
She said she was so bewildered in the sea	She seyde she was so mazed in the see
For anything, though she should die.	For foul ne fair, thogh that she sholde deye.
But who she was she would tell no man,	But what she was she wolde no man seye,
She kneels down and gives thanks for what God has sent;	She kneleth doun and thanketh Goddes sonde;
This woeful woman he brought to the land.	This woful womman broghte he to the londe.
The constable, when he desired no longer to search,	The constable, whan hym lyst no longer seche,
A sort of corrupt Latin was her speech,	A maner Latyn corrupt was hir speche,
Her to deliver from the woe that she was in.	Hire to delivere of wo that she was inne.
The life out of her body to take away,	The lyf out of hir body for to twynne,
In her language mercy she besought,	In hir langage mercy she bisoghte,
He found also the treasure that she brought.	He foond also the tresor that she broghte.
And found this weary woman full of care;	And foond this wery womman ful of care;
To see this wreck, and all the ship he searched,	To seen this wrak, and al the ship he soghte,
The constable of the castle down has come	The constable of the castel doun is fare
The will of Christ was that she should remain there.	The wyl of Crist was that she sholde abyde.
And in the sand her ship stuck so fast	And in the sond hir ship stiked so faste
Far in Northumberland the waves cast her,	Fer in Northhumberlond the wawe hire caste,
Next to a castle that I can not name,	Under an hoold that nempnen I ne kan,
Throughout our wild sea, until at the last	Thurghout oure wilde see, til atte laste
She drives forth into our ocean	She dryveth forth into oure occian
God sent his plenty at their great need.	God sente his foyson at hir grete neede.
To feed with five loaves and two fish.	With loves fyve and fisshes two to feede.
It was as great marvel five thousand folk	Fyve thousand folk it was as greet mervaille
Or in desert? No person but Christ, without doubt.	Or in desert? No wight but Crist, sanz faille.
Three years and more? How lasts her store of provisions?	Thre yeer and moore? How lasteth hire vitaille?
Where could this woman have food and drink	Where myghte this womman mete and drynke have
As well when she woke as when she slept.	As wel whan she wook as whan she slepte.
Who from the tempest always this woman guarded	That fro the tempest ay this womman kepte
Truly, the commander of that was He	Soothly, the comandour of that was he
"Harm neither sea, nor land, nor tree"?	"Anoyeth neither see, ne land, ne tree"?
Both north and south, and also west and east,	Bothe north and south, and also west and est,
That have power to harm land and sea,	That power han t' anoyen lond and see,
Who commanded the four spirits of tempest	Who bad the foure spirites of tempest
Who kept the Hebrew people from their drowning,	That kepte peple Ebrayk from hir drenchynge,
Well may men know it was no one but He	Wel may men knowe it was no wight but he
Until he was spouted up at Nineveh?	Til he was spouted up at Nynyvee?
Who kept Jonas in the fish's maw	Who kepte Jonas in the fisshes mawe
Who kept her from the drowning in the sea?	Who kepte hire fro the drenchyng in the see?
Now since she was not slain at the feast,	Now sith she was nat at the feeste yslawe,
Can not know His prudent foresight.	Ne konne noght knowe his prudent purveiance.
To man's understanding, which, because of our ignorance,	To mannes wit, that for oure ignorance
Does something for a certain reason that is very obscure	Dooth thyng for certein ende that ful derk is
Christ, Who is a medicine for every harm,	Crist, which that is to every harm triacle,
In her, so that we should see his mighty works;	In hire, for we sholde seen his myghty werkis;
God wanted to show his wonderful miracle	God liste to shewe his wonderful myracle
No one but God Whom he bore in his heart.	No wight but God that he bar in his herte.
Was devoured by the lion before he could escape?	Was with the leon frete er he asterte?
Where every person except for him, master and servant,	Ther every wight save he, maister and knave,
Who saved Daniel in the horrible cave	Who saved Danyel in the horrible cave
And I answer to that question in reply,	And I answere to that demande agayn,
Also at the feast? Who could save her body?	Eek at the feeste? Who myghte hir body save?
Unto the place where she shall come to land.	Unto the place ther she shal arryve.
Before the wild waves will drive her	Er that the wilde wawes wol hire dryve
Full often may she expect her death,	After hir deeth ful often may she wayte,
On many a sorry meal now may she feed;	On many a sory meel now may she bayte;
Of Gibraltar, as it was her lot.	Of Marrok, as it was hire aventure.
Throughout the Sea of Greece unto the Strait	Thurghout the See of Grece unto the Strayte
Years and days floated this creature	Yeres and dayes fleet this creature
Guard me, and give me power my life to amend."	Me kepe, and yif me myght my lyf t' amenden."
Over which thy limbs faithfully extend,	On which thy lymes feithfully extenden,
The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spear,	The white Lamb, that hurt was with a spere,
The King of Heaven with his fresh wounds,	The Kyng of Hevene with his woundes newe,
That alone was worthy to bear	That oonly worthy were for to bere
"Victorious tree, protection of true (believers),	"Victorious tree, proteccioun of trewe,
That day that I shall drown in the deep.	That day that I shal drenchen in the depe.
Keep me from the fiend and from his claws,	Me fro the feend and fro his clawes kepe,
That washed the world from the old iniquity,	That wessh the world fro the olde iniquitee,
Red with the blood of the Lamb full of pity,	Reed of the Lambes blood ful of pitee,
"O clear, o blessed altar, holy cross,	"O cleere, o welful auter, hooly croys,
She blesses herself, and with full pitiful voice	She blesseth hire, and with ful pitous voys
He that is lord of Fortune be thy rudder!	He that is lord of Fortune be thy steere!
O Emperor's young daughter dear,	O Emperoures yonge doghter deere,
O my Custance, full of goodness,	O my Custance, ful of benignytee,
And forth she sails in the salt see.	And forth she sailleth in the salte see.
They have given her, and clothes also she had,	They han hire yeven, and clothes eek she hadde,
And, to say the truth, a great store of provisions	And, sooth to seyn, vitaille greet plentee
A certain amount of treasure that she brought there,	A certein tresor that she thider ladde,
Out of Syria back to Italy.	Out of Surrye agaynward to Ytaille.
And in a ship entirely without a rudder, God knows,	And in a ship al steerelees, God woot,
And Custance have they taken right then, immediately,	And Custance han they take anon, foot-hoot,
Who was not all hacked to pieces before he could escape.	That he nas al tohewe er he asterted.
Who knew of the counsel of the Sultan (followed his advice),	That of the conseil of the Sowdan woot,
Nor there was any Syrian that was converted,	Ne ther was Surryen noon that was converted,
For she herself wanted to rule all the country.	For she hirself wolde al the contree lede.
Has with her friends done this cursed deed,	Hath with hir freendes doon this cursed dede,
This old Sultaness, cursed crone,	This olde Sowdanesse, cursed krone,
Except for only Lady Custance alone.	But it were oonly dame Custance allone.
The Sultan and the Christians each one	The Sowdan and the Cristen everichone
For shortly to tell, at one word,	For shortly for to tellen, at o word,
The unexpected woe or harm that follows.	The unwar wo or harm that comth bihynde.
Upon thy glad day have in thy mind	Upon thy glade day have in thy mynde
Hearken to this counsel for thy safety:	Herke this conseil for thy sikernesse:
Woe takes over at the end of our gladness.	Wo occupieth the fyn of oure gladnesse.
The end of the joy of our worldly labor!	The ende of the joye of oure worldly labour!
To worldly bliss, sprinkled with bitterness,	To worldly blisse, spreynd with bitternesse,
O sudden woe, that ever art successor	O sodeyn wo, that evere art successour
And dainties more than I can tell you;	And deyntees mo than I kan yow devyse;
Here may men behold feasting and royalty,	Heere may men feeste and roialtee biholde,
All together, yes, both young and old.	In general, ye, bothe yonge and olde.
And to the feast Christian folk go	And to the feeste Cristen folk hem dresse
Has arranged this feast of which I told,	Ordeyned hath this feeste of which I tolde,
The time having come, this old Sultaness	The tyme cam, this olde Sowdanesse
That revel should stint, and people go to their rest.	That revel stynte, and men goon to hir reste.
When time came, men thought it for the best	Whan tyme cam, men thoughte it for the beste
The essential part of this matter is what I tell.	The fruyt of this matiere is that I telle.
And welcomes her with all joy and bliss.	And welcometh hire with alle joye and blis.
So royally that it is a wonder to tell,	So roially that wonder is to telle,
The Sultan comes himself soon after this	The Sowdan comth hymself soone after this
Planned, under cover of this, very mortally to sting.	Caste under this ful mortally to stynge.
The Sultaness, for all her flattering,	The Sowdanesse, for al hire flaterynge,
But this scorpion, this wicked spirit,	But this scorpioun, this wikked goost,
Than was the assembly of this blissful host.	Than was th' assemblee of this blisful hoost.
Was more royal nor more splendid	Was roialler ne moore curius
Of which Lucan makes such a boastful account,	Of which that Lucan maketh swich a boost,
At a slow pace solemnly they ride.	A softe paas solempnely they ryde.
And to the nearest city there beside	And to the nexte citee ther bisyde
As any mother might have for her daughter dear,	As any mooder myghte hir doghter deere,
Receives her with as glad a demeanor	Receyveth hire with also glad a cheere
The mother of the Sultan, richly dressed and gay,	The mooder of the Sowdan, riche and gay,
Of Syrians and Romans met together;	Of Surryens and Romayns met yfeere;
Large was the crowd, and rich was the assembly	Greet was the prees, and riche was th' array
The honor of his reign to sustain.	The honour of his regne to susteene.
And prayed her to ride to meet the queen,	And preyde hire for to ryde agayn the queene,
First to his mother, and all the reign about,	First to his mooder, and al the regne aboute,
And hastily this Sultan sent his messenger	And hastifliche this Sowdan sente his sonde
In Syria, with a great solemn company,	In Surrye, with a greet solempne route,
This Christian folk have come to land	Arryved been this Cristen folk to londe
She kissed her son, and home she goes her way.	She kiste hir sone, and hoom she gooth hir weye.
So glad he was, he knew not what to say.	So glad he was, he nyste what to seye.
And kneeling thanks her for that request.	And knelynge thanketh hire of that requeste.
The Sultan says, "I will act according to your command."	The Sowdan seith, "I wol doon at youre heeste,"
"To please them I will work hard."	"To plesen hem I wol do my labour."
Beseeching him to do her that honor,	Bisechynge hym to doon hire that honour,
Repenting that she heathen was so long,	Repentynge hire she hethen was so longe,
And take Christendom from a priest's hands,	And cristendom of preestes handes fonge,
And said to him that she would renounce her religion,	And seyde hym that she wolde reneye hir lay,
She rides to the Sultan on a day,	She rydeth to the Sowdan on a day,
Why should I in this tale longer tarry?	What sholde I in this tale lenger tarye?
Privately had her council go their way.	Leet prively hire conseil goon hire way.
This Sultaness, whom I thus blame and curse,	This Sowdanesse, whom I thus blame and warye,
Makest thou of women, when thou wilt deceive.	Makestow of wommen, whan thou wolt bigile.
Thou wilt destroy this Christian marriage.	Thou wolt fordoon this Cristen mariage.
Thou madest Eva bring us into slavery;	Thou madest Eva brynge us in servage;
Well knowest thou the old way to women!	Wel knowestow to wommen the olde way!
That thou were chased from our heritage,	That thou were chaced from oure heritage,
O Satan, envious since that same day	O Sathan, envious syn thilke day
That is bred in thee, nest of every vice!	Is bred in thee, as nest of every vice!
Virtue and innocence, through thy malice,	Vertu and innocence, thurgh thy malice,
O feigned woman, that can destroy all	O feyned womman, al that may confounde
Like the serpent deep in hell bound!	Lik to the serpent depe in helle ybounde!
Virago, thou Semiramis the second!	Virago, thou Semyrame the secounde!
O Sultaness, root of iniquity!	O Sowdanesse, roote of iniquitee!
Though she a baptismal font full of water bring with her."	Thogh she a font-ful water with hire lede."
She shall have need to wash away the red,	She shal have nede to wasshe awey the rede,
For though his wife be christened never so white,	For thogh his wyf be cristned never so white,
That, as I believe, I shall pay back the Sultan.	That, as I trowe, I shal the Sowdan quite.
And I shall such a feast and revel make	And I shal swich a feeste and revel make
Cold water shall not grieve us but a little! --	Coold water shal nat greve us but a lite! --
"We shall first pretend to receive Christendom --	"We shul first feyne us cristendom to take --
Which you shall hear as I shall tell,	Which ye shal heren that I shal devyse,
And she has this enterprise taken in hand,	And she hath this emprise ytake on honde,
To strengthen her shall try (to persuade) all his friends;	To strengthen hire shal alle his frendes fonde;
And every one, in the best way he can,	And everich, in the beste wise he kan,
To live with her and die, and by her stand,	To lyve with hire and dye, and by hire stonde,
They swore and agree, every man,	They sworen and assenten, every man,
And I shall make us safe for evermore?"	And I shal make us sauf for everemoore?"
As I shall say, assenting to my teaching,	As I shal seyn, assentynge to my loore,
But, lords, will you make assurance,	But, lordes, wol ye maken assurance,
And afterward to be dragged into hell,	And afterward in helle to be drawe,
Except slavery to our bodies and suffering,	But thraldom to oure bodies and penance,
"What should come to us from this new religion	"What sholde us tyden of this newe lawe
Before Mohammed's law (goes) out of my heart!	Or Makometes lawe out of myn herte!
The life shall rather out of my body go	The lyf shal rather out of my body sterte
But one vow to great God I promise,	But oon avow to grete God I heete,
Given by God's messenger Mohammed.	Yeven by Goddes message Makomete.
The holy laws of our Koran,	The hooly lawes of our Alkaron,
How my son is about to forsake	How that my sone in point is for to lete
She set herself down, and said as you shall hear.	She sette hire doun, and seyde as ye shal heere.
And when this folk was assembled together,	And whan assembled was this folk in-feere,
And they are come to know what she intended.	And they been come to knowe what she mente.
And right away she sent for her council,	And right anon she for hir conseil sente,
How he will leave his old sacrifices;	How he wol lete his olde sacrifices;
Espied has her son's full intention,	Espied hath hir sones pleyn entente,
The mother of the Sultan, well of vices,	The mooder of the Sowdan, welle of vices,
And turn I will again to my subject matter.	And turne I wole agayn to my matere.
And forth I let her sail in this manner,	And forth I lete hire saille in this manere,
There is no more, but "Farewell, fair Custance!"	Ther nys namoore, but "Farewel, faire Custance!"
"Now Jesus Christ be with you all!" she said;	"Now Jhesu Crist be with yow alle!" she sayde;
Solemnly, with every ceremony.	Solempnely, with every circumstance.
To ship is brought this woeful fair maid	To shippe is brought this woful faire mayde
Alas, we are too ignorant or too slow in wit!	Allas, we been to lewed or to slowe!
Not when an exact date of a birth is known?	Noght whan a roote is of a burthe yknowe?
Especially for folk of noble social status?	Namely to folk of heigh condicioun?
For voyages is there no choice of a favorable time,	Of viage is ther noon eleccioun,
Is no time better than another in such a case?	Is no tyme bet than oother in swich cas?
Imprudent Emperor of Rome, alas!	Imprudent Emperour of Rome, allas!
Where thou were well, from thence art thou driven away.	Ther thou were weel, fro thennes artow weyved.
Thou join thyself where thou art not (well) received;	Thou knyttest thee ther thou art nat receyved;
O feeble moon, unhappy are thy steps!	O fieble moone, unhappy been thy paas!
O Mars, o dominant planet, in this case!	O Mars, o atazir, as in this cas!
Out of his angle into the most unfavorable house!	Out of his angle into the derkeste hous!
From which the lord, helpless, has fallen, alas,	Of which the lord is helplees falle, allas,
Unfortunate ascending oblique house, [see n.]	Infortunat ascendent tortuous,
That cruel Mars has slain this marriage.	That crueel Mars hath slayn this mariage.
Thy impetus set the heaven in such an arrangement	Thy crowdyng set the hevene in swich array
That naturally would go the other way,	That naturelly wolde holde another way,
And hurls all from east to west	And hurlest al from est til occident
With thy daily motion that pushes ever	With thy diurnal sweigh that crowdest ay
O first moving! Cruel firmament,	O firste moevyng! Crueel firmament,
But forth she must go, whether she weeps or sings.	But forth she moot, wher-so she wepe or synge.
As in the chamber was for her departing;	As in the chambre was for hire departynge;
Was not heard such tender weeping for pity	Nas herd swich tendre wepyng for pitee
Who has vanquished Romans three times,	That Romayns hath venquysshed tymes thre,
Before Ilion burned, at Thebes the city,	Or Ilion brende, at Thebes the citee,
I believe at Troy, when Pirrus broke the wall	I trowe at Troye, whan Pirrus brak the wal
And to be under man's governance."	And to been under mannes governance."
Women are born to servitude and suffering,	Wommen are born to thraldom and penance,
I, wretched woman, no matter though I die!	I, wrecche womman, no fors though I spille!
Give me grace his commands to fulfill!	So yeve me grace his heestes to fulfille!
But Christ, that died for our redemption	But Crist, that starf for our redempcioun
I must go right now, since it is your will;	I moste anoon, syn that it is youre wille;
"Alas, unto the pagan world	"Allas, unto the Barbre nacioun
Unto your grace, for I must go to Syria,	Unto youre grace, for I shal to Surrye,
Custance your child commends herself often	Custance youre child hire recomandeth ofte
Over all things, except Christ above,	Over alle thyng, out-taken Crist on-lofte,
And you, my mother, my greatest joy	And ye, my mooder, my soverayn plesance
Thy young daughter fostered up so tenderly,	Thy yonge doghter fostred up so softe,
"Father," she said, "thy wretched child Custance,	"Fader," she seyde, "thy wrecched child Custance,
Wives know that; I dare say you no more.	That knowen wyves; I dar sey yow na moore.
Husbands are all good, and have been for years;	Housbondes been alle goode, and han ben yoore;
By one, (of whom) she knows not his character?	Of oon, she knoweth nat his condicioun?
From friends who so tenderly cared for her,	Fro freendes that so tendrely hire kepte,
She who shall be sent to a foreign nation	That shal be sent to strange nacioun
Alas, what wonder is it though she wept,	Allas, what wonder is it thogh she wepte,
For well she sees there is no other possible conclusion.	For wel she seeth ther is noon oother ende.
Full pale arises, and prepares herself to go;	Ful pale arist, and dresseth hire to wende;
Custance, that was with sorrow all overcome,	Custance, that was with sorwe al overcome,
But to go forth they prepare themselves, one and all.	But forthward they hem dressen, alle and some.
That there may be no longer tarrying,	That ther may be no lenger tariynge,
I say, the woeful fatal day is come,	I seye, the woful day fatal is come,
Receive favorably and lend success to this voyage.	Receyve in gree and spede this viage.
Should pray Christ that He this marriage	Sholde preyen Crist that he this mariage
That every person, with great devotion,	That every wight, with greet devocioun,
And it is made known throughout the town	And notified is thurghout the toun
And other folk enough; this is the sum of it;	And oother folk ynowe; this is th' ende;
Lords, ladies, knights of renown,	Lordes, ladies, knyghtes of renoun,
Bishops are appointed to go with her,	Bisshopes been shapen with hire for to wende,
As was provided for so important an occasion.	As was arrayed for so heigh a cause.
No man can tell in a brief statement	May no man tellen in a litel clause
Has arranged for his daughter, Lady Custance.	Hath shapen for his doghter, dame Custance.
That the Emperor, of his great nobility,	That th' Emperour, of his grete noblesse,
That I should tell all the preparations	That I sholde tellen al the purveiance
Now would some men expect, as I guess,	Now wolde som men waiten, as I gesse,
Now, fair Custance, almighty God thee guide!	Now, faire Custance, almyghty God thee gyde!
This same agreement was sworn on either side;	This same accord was sworn on eyther syde;
And for this provided sufficient pledges.	And heer-to founden sufficient suretee.
And a certain amount of gold, I do not know how much;	And certein gold, I noot what quantitee;
And he shall have Custance in marriage,	And he shal han Custance in mariage,
That the Sultan and his baronage	How that the Sowdan and his baronage
They are agreed, as you shall hear:	They been acorded, so as ye shal heere:
And for the increase of Christ's dear law,	And in encrees of Cristes lawe deere,
That for the destruction of idolatry,	That in destruccioun of mawmettrie,
And all the church, and all the knights,	And al the chirche, and al the chivalrie,
And by the pope's mediation,	And by the popes mediacioun,
I say, by treaty and negotiation,	I seye, by tretys and embassadrie,
What needs greater increase of words?	What nedeth gretter dilatacioun?
For in this woe I can not long endure."	For in this wo I may nat longe endure."
Save my life, and be not negligent	Saveth my lyf, and beth noght recchelees
I pray you to keep your arguments silent;	I prey yow hoold youre argumentz in pees;
I must be hers; I can choose no other.	I moot been hires; I may noon oother chese.
Custance, I will be christened, doubtless.	Custance, I wol be cristned, doutelees.
And he answered, "Rather than I lose	And he answerde, "Rather than I lese
That was taught us by Mohammed, our prophet."	That us was taught by Mahoun, oure prophete."
To wed his child under our sweet religion	Wedden his child under oure lawe sweete
They suppose that no "Christian prince would be willing	They trowe that no "Cristen prince wolde fayn
Between their two religions, that they say	Bitwene hir bothe lawes, that they sayn
By way of reason, to speak all plainly,	By wey of reson, for to speke al playn,
Then saw they in that such difficulty	Thanne sawe they therinne swich difficultee
Nor in any other way, save for marriage.	Ne in noon oother wey, save mariage.
They can not see any advantage in that,	They kan nat seen in that noon avantage,
But finally, in conclusion,	But finally, as in conclusioun,
They speak of magic and deception.	They speken of magyk and abusioun.
Many a subtle argument they laid forth;	Many a subtil resoun forth they leyden;
They argue, consider alternatives;	They argumenten, casten up and doun;
Different men said different things;	Diverse men diverse thynges seyden;
He was as good as dead; and ordered them hastily	He nas but deed; and charged hem in hye
To have Custance within a little time,	To han Custance withinne a litel space,
And said to them, certainly, unless he could have the good fortune	And seyde hem, certein, but he myghte have grace
He has to them declared his intent,	He hath to hem declared his entente,
And, to pass briefly over this matter,	And, shortly of this matiere for to pace,
This Sultan for his privy council sent,	This Sowdan for his privee conseil sente,
That no person can well interpret it fully.	That no wight kan wel rede it atte fulle.
The death; but men's wits are so dull	The deeth; but mennes wittes ben so dulle
Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates	Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
Of Pompey, Julius, before they were born;	Of Pompei, Julius, er they were born;
Was written the death of Hector, Achilles,	Was writen the deeth of Ector, Achilles,
In stars, many a winter before then,	In sterres, many a wynter therbiforn,
The death of every man, without doubt.	The deeth of every man, withouten drede.
Is written, God knows, whoever could read it,	Is writen, God woot, whoso koude it rede,
For in the stars, clearer than is glass,	For in the sterres, clerer than is glas,
That he because of love should have his death, alas!	That he for love sholde han his deeth, allas!
In stars, when he was born,	With sterres, whan that he his birthe took,
Which men call the heaven was written	Which that men clepe the hevene ywriten was
Was to love her while his life may endure.	Was for to love hire while his lyf may dure.
That all his desire and all his intense concern	That al his lust and al his bisy cure
To have her figure in his remembrance,	To han hir figure in his remembrance,
That this Sultan has caught such great desire	That this Sowdan hath caught so greet plesance
Such great noble qualities in earnest, in detail,	So greet noblesse in ernest, ceriously,
These merchants have told him of Lady Custance	Thise marchantz han hym toold of dame Custance
Amongst other things, specially,	Amonges othere thynges, specially,
The wonders that they could have seen or heard.	The wondres that they myghte seen or heere.
News from various countries, to learn	Tidynges of sondry regnes, for to leere
He would, of his gracious courtesy,	He wolde, of his benigne curteisye,
For when they came from any foreign place,	For whan they cam from any strange place,
Of him that was the Sultan of Syria;	Of hym that was the Sowdan of Surrye;
Now it happened that these merchants stood in the good graces	Now fil it that thise marchantz stode in grace
And live in prosperity; I can tell you no more.	And lyven in wele; I kan sey yow namoore.
And they conduct their business as they have done for years,	And doon hir nedes as they han doon yoore,
Home to Syria they have gone very happily,	Hoom to Surrye been they went ful fayn,
And when they have this blissful maiden seen,	And whan they han this blisful mayden sayn,
These merchants have had their ships newly loaded,	Thise marchantz han doon fraught hir shippes newe,
And all this opinion was true, as God is true.	And al this voys was sooth, as God is trewe.
Her hand, minister of generosity in giving alms."	Hir hand, ministre of fredam for almesse."
Her heart is a true chamber of holiness,	Hir herte is verray chambre of hoolynesse,
She is mirror of all courtesy;	She is mirour of alle curteisye;
Humility has slain in her all tyranny.	Humblesse hath slayn in hire al tirannye.
In all her deeds virtue is her guide;	To alle hire werkes vertu is hir gyde;
Youth, without immaturity or folly;	Yowthe, withoute grenehede or folye;
"In her is great beauty, without pride,	"In hire is heigh beautee, withoute pride,
And would she were of all Europe the queen.	And wolde she were of al Europe the queene.
There was never such another as is she.	Nas nevere swich another as is shee.
To consider as well her goodness as beauty,	To rekene as wel hir goodnesse as beautee,
A daughter has that, since the world began,	A doghter hath that, syn the world bigan,
"Our Emperor of Rome -- may God look after him! --	"Oure Emperour of Rome -- God hym see! --
This was the common opinion of every man:	This was the commune voys of every man:
From day to day, as I shall tell you.	Fro day to day, as I shal yow devyse.
Unto these Syrian merchants in such a manner,	Unto thise Surryen marchantz in swich wyse,
Was reported, in full detail,	Reported was, with every circumstance,
Of the Emperor's daughter, Lady Custance,	Of the Emperoures doghter, dame Custance,
A certain length of time, as accorded with their desires.	A certein tyme, as fil to hire plesance.
These merchants have sojourned in that town	Sojourned han thise merchantz in that toun
For their purposes, they take their lodging.	For hire entente, they take hir herbergage.
And in such a place as they thought advantageous	And in swich place as thoughte hem avantage
But came themselves to Rome; this is the sum of it.	But comen hemself to Rome; this is the ende.
No other messenger would they thither send,	Noon oother message wolde they thider sende,
Were it for business or for pleasure,	Were it for chapmanhod or for disport,
Have prepared themselves to travel to Rome;	Han shapen hem to Rome for to wende;
Now it happened that the masters of that company	Now fil it that the maistres of that sort
That every person has desire to trade	That every wight hath deyntee to chaffare
Their merchandise was so serviceable and so novel	Hir chaffare was so thrifty and so newe
Cloth of gold, and satins rich in color.	Clothes of gold, and satyns riche of hewe.
That wherever they sent their oriental goods,	That wyde-where senten hir spicerye,
Of rich merchants, and moreover trustworthy and true,	Of chapmen riche, and therto sadde and trewe,
In Syria once dwelt a company	In Surrye whilom dwelte a compaignye
Here begins the tale of the Man of Law.	Heere begynneth the Man of Lawe his tale.
Taught me a tale, which you shall hear.	Me taughte a tale, which that ye shal heere.
Were it not that a merchant, gone by is many a year,	Nere that a marchant, goon is many a yeere,
And tales, both of peace and of war.	And tales, bothe of pees and of debaat.
Of (foreign) lands; you are fathers of tidings	Of regnes; ye been fadres of tidynges
As wise folk you know all the condition	As wise folk ye knowen al th' estaat
You seek land and sea for your winnings;	Ye seken lond and see for yowre wynnynges;
At Christmas merrily may you dance!	At Cristemasse myrie may ye daunce!
But with six five, that is your winning number;	But with sys cynk, that renneth for youre chaunce;
Your bags are not filled with double aces (a losing throw in dice),	Youre bagges been nat fild with ambes as,
O noble, o prudent folk, in such a case as this!	O noble, o prudent folk, as in this cas!
O rich merchants, full of prosperity are you,	O riche marchauntz, ful of wele been yee,
If thou be poor, thy brother hates thee,	If thou be povre, thy brother hateth thee,
Beware, therefore, before thou come to that point!	Be war, therfore, er thou come to that prikke!
"All the days of poor men are painful."	"Alle the dayes of povre men been wikke."
Yet of the wise man take this advice:	Yet of the wise man take this sentence:
If thou be poor, farewell thy reverence!	If thou be povre, farwel thy reverence!
"Thy very neighbor will despise thee."	"Thy selve neighebor wol thee despise."
"Better it is to die than to have poverty";	"Bet is to dyen than have indigence";
Listen to what is the opinion of the wise:	Herkne what is the sentence of the wise:
For he helps not the needy in their need."	For he noght helpeth needfulle in hir neede."
"By my faith," sayest thou, "sometimes he shall pay for it,	"Parfay," seistow, "somtyme he rekene shal,
And sayest thou hast too little and he has all.	And seist thou hast to lite and he hath al.
Thy neighbor thou blamest sinfully,	Thy neighebor thou wytest synfully,
He wrongly allots temporal riches;	He mysdeparteth richesse temporal;
Thou blamest Christ and sayest full bitterly	Thow blamest Crist and seist ful bitterly
Either steal, or beg, or borrow thy living expenses!	Or stele, or begge, or borwe thy despence!
Despite all you can do, thou must for indigence	Maugree thyn heed, thou most for indigence
That true need reveals all thy hidden wound!	That verray nede unwrappeth al thy wounde hid!
If thou ask for none, thou art so wounded by need	If thou noon aske, with nede artow so woundid
By thirst, by cold, by hunger so distressed!	With thurst, with coold, with hunger so confoundid!
O hateful harm, condition of poverty!	O hateful harm, condicion of poverte!
The Prologue of the Man's Tale of Law	The Prologe of the Mannes Tale of Law
Began his tale, as you shall after hear.	Bigan his tale, as ye shal after heere.
And with that word he, with a solemn demeanor,	And with that word he, with a sobre cheere,
I speak in prose, and let him make rhymes."	I speke in prose, and lat him rymes make."
Though I come after him with a humble dish.	Though I come after hym with hawebake.
But nonetheless, I reckon it not worth a bean	But nathelees, I recche noght a bene
Metamorphoses shows what I mean;	Methamorphosios woot what I mene;
I would hate to be likened, doubtless,	Me were looth be likned, doutelees,
"But of my tale what shall I do this day?	"But of my tale how shal I doon this day?
Nor will I tell any such, if that I may.	Ne I wol noon reherce, if that I may.
Of such unnatural abominations,	Of swiche unkynde abhomynacions,
Would never write in any of his compositions	Nolde nevere write in none of his sermons
And therefore he, after careful consideration	And therfore he, of ful avysement,
When he threw her upon the pavement.	Whan he hir threw upon the pavement.
That is so horrible a tale to read,	That is so horrible a tale for to rede,
Deprived his daughter of her maidenhead,	Birafte his doghter of hir maydenhede,
Or else of Apollonius of Tyre,	Or ellis of Tyro Appollonius,
Of such cursed stories I say fie! --	Of swiche cursed stories I sey fy! --
Who loved her own brother sinfully --	That loved hir owene brother synfully --
Of that wicked example of Canace,	Of thilke wikke ensample of Canacee,
"But certainly no word writes he	"But certeinly no word ne writeth he
Your wifehood he commends with the best!	Youre wifhod he comendeth with the beste!
O Hypermnestra, Penelope, Alcestis,	O Ypermystra, Penelopee, Alceste,
Because of thy Jason, that was in love so false!	For thy Jason, that was of love so fals!
Thy little children hanging by the neck,	Thy litel children hangynge by the hals,
Of Briseis, and of thee, Laodamia;	Of Brixseyde, and of the, Ladomya;
The tears of Helen, and also the woe	The teeris of Eleyne, and eek the wo
The drowned Leander for his Hero;	The dreynte Leandre for his Erro;
The barren isle standing in the sea --	The bareyne yle stondynge in the see --
Of Ariadne, and of Hypsipyle --	Of Adriane, and of Isiphilee --
The complaint of Deianire and of Hermione,	The pleinte of Dianire and of Hermyon,
The tree of Phyllis for her Demophon;	The tree of Phillis for hire Demophon;
The sword of Dido (used) because of the false Aeneas;	The swerd of Dido for the false Enee;
Of Lucretia, and Thisbe of Babylon;	Of Lucresse, and of Babilan Tesbee;
Called the Saints' Legend of Cupid,	Cleped the Seintes Legende of Cupide,
Whoever will seek his large volume,	Whoso that wole his large volume seke,
These noble wives and these lovers also.	Thise noble wyves and thise loveris eke.
And since has he spoken of each one,	And sitthen hath he spoken of everichone,
"In youth he wrote about Ceyx and Alcion,	"In youthe he made of Ceys and Alcione,
Why should I tell them, since they have been told?	What sholde I tellen hem, syn they been tolde?
In his Epistles, that are very old.	In his Episteles, that been ful olde.
More than Ovid made mention of	Mo than Ovide made of mencioun
For he has told of lovers up and down	For he hath toold of loveris up and doun
And if he has not said them, dear brother,	And if he have noght seyd hem, leve brother,
Long ago, as knows many a man;	Of olde tyme, as knoweth many a man;
Has (not already) said them in such English as he knows	Hath seyd hem in swich Englissh as he kan
Of meters and of riming craftily,	On metres and on rymyng craftily,
That Chaucer, though he is ignorant	That Chaucer, thogh he kan but lewedly
Right now I can tell no suitable tale	I kan right now no thrifty tale seyn
Thus our text will have it. But nonetheless, certainly,	Thus wole oure text. But nathelees, certeyn,
He should himself use it, by right;	He sholde hymselven usen it, by right;
For such law as a man gives another person,	For swich lawe as a man yeveth another wight,
Promise is debt, and I will eagerly keep	Biheste is dette, and I wole holde fayn
To break our agreement is not my intent.	To breke forward is nat myn entente.
"Host," said he, "in God's name, I assent;	"Hooste," quod he, "depardieux, ich assente;
Then have you done your duty at the least."	Thanne have ye do youre devoir atte leeste."
Now fulfill your promise;	Acquiteth yow now of youre biheeste;
To stand in this case at my judgment.	To stonden in this cas at my juggement.
You have submitted, through your free assent,	Ye been submytted, thurgh youre free assent,
Tell us a tale now, as was agreed.	Telle us a tale anon, as forward is.
"Sir Man of Law," said he, "as you may have bliss,	"Sire Man of Lawe," quod he, "so have ye blis,
When she has lost it in her wantonness.	Whan she hath lost it in hir wantownesse.
No more than will Malkin's maidenhead,	Nomoore than wole Malkynes maydenhede,
It will not come again, without doubt,	It wol nat come agayn, withouten drede,
But loss of time ruins us,' said he.	But los of tyme shendeth us,' quod he.
For `Loss of property may be recovered,	For `Los of catel may recovered be,
Bewail time more than gold in coffer;	Biwaillen tyme moore than gold in cofre;
Well can Seneca and many a philosopher	Wel kan Senec and many a philosophre
Descending from the mountain into the plain.	Descendynge from the mountaigne into playn.
As does the stream that never turns back,	As dooth the streem that turneth nevere agayn,
And steals from us, in part imperceptibly when sleeping,	And steleth from us, what pryvely slepynge,
Gentlemen, the time wastes away night and day,	Lordynges, the tyme wasteth nyght and day,
Lose no time, insofar as you can.	Leseth no tyme, as ferforth as ye may.
Now for the love of God and of Saint John,	Now for the love of God and of Seint John,
One fourth of this day is gone.	The fourthe party of this day is gon.
"Gentlemen," said he, "I warn you, all this company,	"Lordynges," quod he, "I warne yow, al this route,
And suddenly he pulled his horse about.	And sodeynly he plighte his horse aboute.
It was ten o'clock, he did conclude,	It was ten of the clokke, he gan conclude,
And for that day, in that latitude,	And for that day, as in that latitude,
That Phoebus, which shone so clear and bright,	That Phebus, which that shoon so clere and brighte,
And therefore by the shadow he judged	And therefore by the shadwe he took his wit
As was the erect body that caused it.	That was the body erect that caused it.
Was in length the same quantity	Was in lengthe the same quantitee
And saw well that the shadow of every tree	And saugh wel that the shadwe of every tree
Of April, that is messenger to May;	Of Aprill, that is messager to May;
He knew it was the eighteenth day	He wiste it was the eightetethe day
And though he was not far advanced in learning,	And though he were not depe ystert in loore,
One fourth, and half an hour and more,	The ferthe part, and half an houre and moore,
Our Host saw well that the bright sun	Oure Hooste saugh wel that the brighte sonne
The words of the host to the company.	The wordes of the Hoost to the compaignye.
To tell all; therefore my tale is done."	To tellen al; wherfore my tale is do."
And also my wit suffices not concerning this	And eek my wit suffiseth nat therto
Since women know how to display such wares;	Syn wommen konnen outen swich chaffare;
By whom, it needs not to declare,	Of whom, it nedeth nat for to declare,
And told to her by some of this company --	And toold to hire of somme of this meynee --
And the cause why? It should reported be	And cause why? It sholde reported be
Which she has, indeed I would be too foolish.	Which that she hath, ywis I were to nyce.
I sorely rue that I am unto her tied.	Me reweth soore I am unto hire teyd.
But know you what? In secret be it said,	But wyte ye what? In conseil be it seyd,
Thereof no matter! Let all such things go by.	Therof no fors! Lat alle swiche thynges go.
And yet she has a heap of other vices;	And yet she hath an heep of vices mo;
But of her tongue, a blabbing shrew is she,	But of hir tonge, a labbyng shrewe is she,
I have a wife, though that she poor be,	I have a wyf, though that she povre be,
But doubtless, as true as any steel	But doutelees, as trewe as any steel
By this Merchant's tale it is well proven.	By this Marchauntes tale it preveth weel.
And from the truth ever will they deviate;	And from the soothe evere wol they weyve;
Are in women! For always as busy as bees	In wommen been! For ay as bisy as bees
Lo, what tricks and craftiness	Lo, whiche sleightes and subtilitees
"Now such a wife I pray God keep me from!	"Now swich a wyf I pray God kepe me fro!
"Ah! God's mercy!" said our Host then,	"Ey! Goddes mercy!" seyde oure Hooste tho,
God bless us, and his mother Saint Mary!	God blesse us, and his mooder Seinte Marie!
Thus ends here my tale of January;	Thus endeth heere my tale of Januarie;
Now, good men, I pray you to be glad.	Now, goode men, I pray yow to be glad.
And to his palace he has her led home.	And to his palays hoom he hath hire lad.
And on her womb he strokes her full softly,	And on hire wombe he stroketh hire ful softe,
This January, who is glad but he?	This Januarie, who is glad but he?
And with that word she leaped down from the tree.	And with that word she leep doun fro the tree.
He that misunderstands, he misjudges."	He that mysconceyveth, he mysdemeth."
And it is entirely different than it seems.	And it is al another than it semeth.
Full many a man supposes to see a thing,	Ful many a man weneth to seen a thyng,
Beware, I pray you, for by heaven's king,	Beth war, I prey yow, for by hevene kyng,
There may full many a sight deceive you.	Ther may ful many a sighte yow bigile.
Until your sight be settled a while	Til that youre sighte ysatled be a while
As he that has a day or two been able to see.	As he that hath a day or two yseyn.
Can not suddenly so well see,	Ne may nat sodeynly so wel yse,
Right so a man that long has blind been,	Right so a man that longe hath blynd ybe,
Until he be fully awakened.	Til that he be adawed verraily.
Of a thing, nor see it perfectly,	Upon a thyng, ne seen it parfitly,
He can not suddenly well take heed	He may nat sodeynly wel taken keep
But, sir, a man that wakes out of his sleep,	But, sire, a man that waketh out of his sleep,
"Yea, sir," said she, "you may think as you please.	"Ye, sire," quod she, "ye may wene as yow lest.
And thy smock had lain upon his breast."	And that thy smok hadde leyn upon his brest."
How this Damian had by thee laid,	How that this Damyan hadde by thee leyn,
So God help me, I am very sorry.	God helpe me so, as I am yvele apayd.
Come down, my dear, and if I have misspoken,	Com doun, my lief, and if I have myssayd,
"Now, lady," said he, "let all pass out of mind.	"Now, dame," quod he, "lat al passe out of mynde.
Alas," said she, "that ever I was so kind!"	Allas," quod she, "that evere I was so kynde!"
"This thanks have I because I have made you see.	"This thank have I for I have maad yow see.
"You are dazed, dazed, good sir," said she;	"Ye maze, maze, goode sire," quod she;
And by my troth, it seemed to me he did thee so."	And by my trouthe, me thoughte he dide thee so."
Thanked be God! With both my eyes two,	Thonked be God! With bothe myne eyen two,
"I see," said he, "as well as ever I could,	"I se," quod he, "as wel as evere I myghte,
You would not say these words unto me.	Ye wolde nat seyn thise wordes unto me.
For certainly, if you could see,	For certeinly, if that ye myghte se,
"Then is," said she, "my medicine false;	"Thanne is," quod she, "my medicyne fals;
And else may I be hanged by the neck!"	And elles be I hanged by the hals!"
He screwed thee; I saw it with my eyes,	He swyved thee; I saugh it with myne yen,
God give you both a shameful death to die!	God yeve yow bothe on shames deth to dyen!
"Struggle?" said he, "Yea, indeed in it went!	"Strugle?" quod he, "Ye, algate in it wente!
God knows, I did it in full good intent."	God woot, I dide it in ful good entente."
Than to struggle with a man upon a tree.	Than strugle with a man upon a tree.
As I was taught, to heal with your eyes,	As me was taught, to heele with youre eyen,
Upon peril of my soul, I shall not lie,	Up peril of my soule, I shal nat lyen,
I have helped you with both your eyes blind.	I have yow holpe on bothe youre eyen blynde.
Have patience and reason in your mind.	Have pacience and resoun in youre mynde.
And she answered, "Sir, what ails you?	And she answerde, "Sire, what eyleth yow?
"O brazen crude lady, what dost thou?"	"O stronge lady stoore, what dostow?"
"Out! Help! Alas! Help!" he began to cry,	"Out! Help! Allas! Harrow!" he gan to crye,
As does the mother when the child shall die:	As dooth the mooder whan the child shal dye:
And up he gave a roaring and a cry,	And up he yaf a roryng and a cry,
In such a manner it can not be expressed,	In swich manere it may nat been expressed,
And saw that Damian had treated his wife	And saugh that Damyan his wyf had dressed
Up to the tree he cast his eyes two,	Up to the tree he caste his eyen two,
But on his wife his thought was evermore.	But on his wyf his thoght was everemo.
There was never man of anything so happy,	Ne was ther nevere man of thyng so fayn,
And when he had recovered his sight again,	And whan that he hadde caught his sighte agayn,
And made him see as well as he ever could.	And made hym se as wel as evere he myghte.
To January he gave again his sight,	To Januarie he gaf agayn his sighte,
And when Pluto saw this great wrong,	And whan that Pluto saugh this grete wrong,
And suddenly at once this Damian	And sodeynly anon this Damyan
I can not use circumlocutions, I am an unlearned man --	I kan nat glose, I am a rude man --
Ladies, I pray you that you be not angry;	Ladyes, I prey yow that ye be nat wrooth;
And caught her by a branch, and up she goes --	And caughte hire by a twiste, and up she gooth --
He stoops down, and on his back she stood,	He stoupeth doun, and on his bak she stood,
(Even if) I might you help with my heart's blood."	Mighte I yow helpen with myn herte blood."
"Certainly," said he, "there shall be no lack,	"Certes," quod he, "theron shal be no lak,
"If I my foot might set upon your back."	"So I my foot myghte sette upon youre bak."
Then should I climb well enough," said she,	Thanne sholde I clymbe wel ynogh," quod she,
The pear tree within your arms to take,	The pyrie inwith youre armes for to take,
"But would you grant, for God's sake,	"But wolde ye vouche sauf, for Goddes sake,
"For I am blind!" "Yea, sir, no matter," said she;	"For I am blynd!" "Ye, sire, no fors," quod she;
That could climb! Alas, alas," said he,	That koude clymbe! Allas, allas," quod he,
"Alas," said he, "that I do not have here a servant boy	"Allas," quod he, "that I ne had heer a knave
That she may die but she have some of it."	That she may dyen but she of it have."
May have for fruit so great an appetite	May han to fruyt so greet an appetit
I tell you well, a woman in my condition	I telle yow wel, a womman in my plit
Help, for her love that is of heaven queen!	Help, for hir love that is of hevene queene!
Or I must die, so sore I long	Or I moot dye, so soore longeth me
I must have some of the pears that I see,	I moste han of the peres that I see,
Now sire," said she, "for whatever may happen,	Now sire," quod she, "for aught that may bityde,
Began to sigh, and said, "Alas, my side!	Gan for to syke, and seyde, "Allas, my syde!
This fresh May, who is so bright and sheen,	This fresshe May, that is so bright and sheene,
On high among the fresh leaves green.	An heigh among the fresshe leves grene.
Where this Damian sits full merry	Where as this Damyan sitteth ful myrie
Until he was come in front of that same pear tree	Til he was come agaynes thilke pyrie
So long about the garden paths is he gone,	So longe aboute the aleyes is he goon,
Sings full merrier than the parrot,	Syngeth ful murier than the papejay,
That in the garden with his fair May	That in the gardyn with his faire May
Now let us turn again to January,	Now lat us turne agayn to Januarie,
For truly, I will no longer contradict you."	For sothe, I wol no lenger yow contrarie."
Let us have no more words concerning this;	Lat us namoore wordes heerof make;
Her answer shall she have, I declare.	Hir answere shal she have, I undertake.
"And I," said she, "a queen of Fairy!	"And I," quod she, "a queene of Fayerye!
I am a king; it is not proper for me to lie."	I am a kyng; it sit me noght to lye."
My word shall stand, I warn you certainly.	My word shal stonde, I warne yow certeyn.
I give it up! But since I swore my oath	I yeve it up! But sith I swoor myn ooth
"My Lady," said this Pluto, "be no longer angry;	"Dame," quod this Pluto, "be no lenger wrooth;
To speak harm of him that would do us dishonor."	To speke hym harm that wolde us vileynye."
I shall not cease, for any courtesy,	I shal nat spare, for no curteisye,
As ever whole I may enjoy my hair (remain alive),	As evere hool I moote brouke my tresses,
For since he said that we are chatterers,	For sithen he seyde that we been jangleresses,
Or else swell until my heart breaks.	Or elles swelle til myn herte breke.
I am a woman, I must necessarily speak,	I am a womman, nedes moot I speke,
That you of women write not worth a butterfly!	That ye of wommen write, a boterflye!
Have lost his reign sooner than he would have wanted.	Have lost his regne rather than he wolde.
Spared him for his father's sake, he should	Yspared him for his fadres sake, he sholde
And if God had not, as says the book,	And if God ne hadde, as seith the book,
And in his old age he true God forsook;	And in his elde he verray God forsook;
He was a lecher and an idolater,	He was a lecchour and an ydolastre,
By God, however approvingly you gloss over his name,	Pardee, as faire as ye his name emplastre,
How might he do a thing that more forbidden is?	How myghte he do a thyng that moore forbode is?
So made he also a temple of false gods.	So made he eek a temple of false goddis.
Why though he was rich and glorious?	What though he were riche and glorious?
Why make you so much of Solomon?	What make ye so muche of Salomon?
"Ah! by him who is the only true God,	"Ey! for verray God that nys but oon,
There is no one but God, neither man nor woman.	Nis noon but God, but neither he ne she.
He meant thus, that in perfect goodness	He mente thus, that in sovereyn bontee
I pray you take the meaning of the man;	I prey yow take the sentence of the man;
Though he said he found no good woman,	Though that he seyde he foond no good womman,
But, sir, be not angry, even though it be so,	But, sire, ne be nat wrooth, al be it so,
Of many a genuine, true wife also.	Of many a verray, trewe wyf also.
The Roman histories also remind us	The Romayn geestes eek make remembrance
Witness on them that dwell in Christ's house (heaven);	Witnesse on hem that dwelle in Cristes hous;
Women full true, full good, and virtuous.	Wommen ful trewe, ful goode, and vertuous.
Yet many another man has there found	Yet hath ther founde many another man
But though he found no good woman,	But though that he ne foond no good womman,
Found of us women many a fool.	Foond of us wommen fooles many oon.
I know well that this Jew, this Solomon,	I woot wel that this Jew, this Salomon,
"What do I care for your authorities?	"What rekketh me of youre auctoritees?
So that you men shall be as ignorant as geese.	So that ye men shul been as lewed as gees.
And weep, and swear, and chide deceitfully,	And wepe, and swere, and chyde subtilly,
Although a man had seen a thing with both his eyes,	Al hadde man seyn a thyng with bothe his yen,
For lack of answer none of them shall die.	For lak of answere noon of hem shal dyen.
And bear them down who would them accuse.	And bere hem doun that wolden hem accuse.
With bold face they shall themselves excuse,	With face boold they shulle hemself excuse,
That, though they be in any guilt taken,	That, though they be in any gilt ytake,
And all women afterwards, for her sake,	And alle wommen after, for hir sake,
That I shall give her sufficient answer,	That I shal yeven hire suffisant answere,
Now by my mother's father's soul I swear	Now by my moodres sires soule I swere
"You shall?" said Proserpine, "will you so?	"Ye shal?" quod Proserpyne, "wol ye so?
Then shall he know all her harlotry,	Thanne shal he knowen al hire harlotrye,
When his wife would do him villainy.	Whan that his wyf wold doon hym vileynye.
That he shall have again his eyes' sight,	That he shal have ayen his eyen syght,
Unto this old, blind, worthy knight	Unto this olde, blynde, worthy knyght
Now will I grant, of my majesty,	Now wol I graunten, of my magestee,
Lo, where he sits, the lecher, in the tree!	Lo, where he sit, the lechour, in the tree!
His own man shall make him cuckold.	His owene man shal make hym cokewold.
Because, alas, that he is blind and old,	By cause, allas, that he is blynd and old,
See you not this honorable knight,	Ne se ye nat this honurable knyght,
A wild fir and corrupt pestilence	A wylde fyr and corrupt pestilence
Speaks reverence of you but seldom.	Ne speketh of yow but seelde reverence.
And Jesus, son of Sirak, as I suppose,	And Jhesus, filius Syrak, as I gesse,
"Thus says the king that knows your wickedness.	"Thus seith the kyng that knoweth youre wikkednesse.
But of all women found I none.'	But of wommen alle foond I noon.'
`Amongst a thousand men yet found I one,	`Amonges a thousand men yet foond I oon,
Thus praises he yet the goodness of man:	Thus preiseth he yet the bountee of man:
To every one that wit and reason knows.	To every wight that wit and reson kan.
Full worthy are thy words to (keep in) memory	Ful worthy been thy wordes to memorie
O Solomon, wise, and richest of wealth,	O Salomon, wys, and richest of richesse,
(That are) famous concerning your faithlessness and frailty.	Notable of youre untrouthe and brotilnesse.
Ten hundred thousand [tales] I can tell	Ten hondred thousand [tales] tellen I kan
The treasons which women do to man.	The tresons whiche that wommen doon to man.
The experience so proves every day	Th' experience so preveth every day
"My wife," said he, "there can no one say nay;	"My wyf," quod he, "ther may no wight seye nay;
And right away thus said he to his queen:	And right anon thus seyde he to his queene:
Upon a bench made of pieces of turf, fresh and green,	Upon a bench of turves, fressh and grene,
This king of Fairyland then set himself down	This kyng of Fairye thanne adoun hym sette
In Claudian you can read the stories,	In Claudyan ye may the stories rede,
While she gathered flowers in the mead --	Whil that she gadered floures in the mede --
Whom he kidnapped out of Etna	Which that he ravysshed out of [Ethna]
Following his wife, the queen Proserpine,	Folwynge his wyf, the queene Proserpyna,
And many a lady in his company,	And many a lady in his compaignye,
Pluto, that is king of Fairyland,	Pluto, that is kyng of Fayerye,
That in that garden, in the further side,	That in that gardyn, in the ferther syde,
And it so befell, that bright morning-tide	And so bifel, that brighte morwe-tyde
Of Cancer, Jove's exaltation.	Of Cancer, Jovis exaltacion.
He was that time in Gemini, as I guess,	He was that tyme in Geminis, as I gesse,
To gladden every flower with his warmness.	To gladen every flour with his warmnesse.
Phoebus has his streams of gold down sent	Phebus hath of gold his stremes doun ysent
Bright was the day, and blue the firmament;	Bright was the day, and blew the firmament;
And January and May roaming merrily.	And Januarie and May romynge myrie.
And thus I let him sit upon the pear tree,	And thus I lete hym sitte upon the pyrie,
Of this matter, what he must do.	Of this matere, how he werchen shal.
For in a letter she had told him all	For in a lettre she hadde toold hym al
Well better than January, her own mate,	Wel bet than Januarie, hir owene make,
For truly he knew all her plan,	For verraily he knew al hire entente,
That loaded was with fruit, and up he went.	That charged was with fruyt, and up he wente.
That Damian should climb upon a tree	That Damyan sholde clymbe upon a tree
And with her finger signs made she	And with hir fynger signes made she
Sat in the bush, and she began to cough,	Sat in the bussh, and coughen she bigan,
And with that word she saw where Damian	And with that word she saugh wher Damyan
Except to speak to us of distrust and reproof."	But speke to us of untrust and repreeve."
You have no other manner of behavior, I believe,	Ye han noon oother contenance, I leeve,
And women have reproof of you always.	And wommen have repreve of yow ay newe.
I am a gentle woman and no wench.	I am a gentil womman and no wenche.
And in the next river have me drowned.	And in the nexte ryver do me drenche.
Have me stripped and put me in a sack,	Do strepe me and put me in a sak,
That I be false; and if I commit that offense,	That I be fals; and if I do that lak,
Or else I damage so my name,	Or elles I empeyre so my name,
If ever I do unto my kin that shame,	If evere I do unto my kyn that shame,
That I do not die, as foully as woman can,	That I ne sterve, as foule as womman may,
I pray to God that never dawn the day	I prey to God that nevere dawe the day
By the leave of you, my lord so dear:	By the leve of yow, my lord so deere:
When the priest to you my body bound;	Whan that the preest to yow my body bond;
Which I have entrusted in your hand,	Which that I have assured in youre hond,
And of my wifehood that same tender flower,	And of my wyfhod thilke tendre flour,
As well as you, and also my honor,	As wel as ye, and also myn honour,
"I have," said she, "a soul to keep	"I have," quod she, "a soule for to kepe
But first of all she began to weep.	But first and forward she bigan to wepe.
Graciously to January answered,	Benyngnely to Januarie answerde,
This fresh May, when she these words heard,	This fresshe May, whan she thise wordes herde,
Now kiss me, wife, and let us roam about."	Now kys me, wyf, and lat us rome aboute."
Bear to be out of your company	Forbere to been out of youre compaignye
I can not, certainly, though I should die,	I may nat, certes, though I sholde dye,
And in addition to that the unsuitable old age of me,	And therwithal the unlikly elde of me,
That, when I consider your beauty	That, whan that I considere youre beautee
You are so deeply imprinted in my thought	Ye been so depe enprented in my thoght
And though that I be jealous, blame me not.	And though that I be jalous, wyte me noght.
I pray you first, to seal the contract, you kiss me;	I prey yow first, in covenant ye me kisse;
As God my soul may bring in bliss.	So wisly God my soule brynge in blisse.
This shall be done to-morrow before sun goes to rest,	This shal be doon to-morwe er sonne reste,
And all my heritage, town and tower;	And al myn heritage, toun and tour;
First, love of Christ, and to yourself honor,	First, love of Crist, and to youreself honour,
Three things, certainly, shall you win thereby:	Thre thynges, certes, shal ye wynne therby:
Be to me true, and I will tell you why.	Beth to me trewe, and I wol telle yow why.
And although I be old and can not see,	And though that I be oold and may nat see,
But only for the love I had to thee.	But oonly for the love I had to thee.
Not for any greed, doubtless,	Noght for no coveitise, doutelees,
For God's sake, think how I thee chose,	For Goddes sake, thenk how I thee chees,
Than thee offend, true dear wife!	Than thee offende, trewe deere wyf!
For by that Lord that sits in heaven above,	For by that Lord that sit in hevene above,
That art the creature that I best love.	That art the creature that I best love.
"Now wife," said he, "here is no one but thou and I,	"Now wyf," quod he, "heere nys but thou and I,
And closed the gate quickly.	And clapte to the wyket sodeynly.
Into his fresh garden has gone,	Into his fresshe gardyn is ago,
With May in his hand, and no one else,	With Mayus in his hand, and no wight mo,
This January, as blind as is a stone,	This Januarie, as blynd as is a stoon,
And quickly he sits still under a bush.	And stille he sit under a bussh anon.
That no one could either see or hear it,	That no wight myghte it se neither yheere,
This Damian then has opened the gate,	This Damyan thanne hath opened the wyket,
That he should go before with his latchkey.	That he sholde go biforn with his cliket.
To Damian a sign made she,	On Damyan a signe made she,
Such old ignorant words used he.	Swiche olde lewed wordes used he.
I chose thee for my wife and my comfort."	I chees thee for my wyf and my confort."
Come forth, and let us take our pleasure;	Com forth, and lat us taken oure disport;
No blemish on thee knew I all my life.	No spot of thee ne knew I al my lyf.
Thou hast me wounded in my heart, O wife!	Thou hast me wounded in myn herte, O wyf!
Come forth, my white spouse! Beyond doubt	Com forth, my white spouse! Out of doute
How fairer are thy breasts than is wine!	How fairer been thy brestes than is wyn!
Come forth now, with thy dove-like eyes!	Com forth now, with thyne eyen columbyn!
The winter is gone with all his rains wet.	The wynter is goon with alle his reynes weete.
The turtle dove's voice is heard, my dove sweet;	The turtles voys is herd, my dowve sweete;
"Rise up, my wife, my love, my noble lady!	"Rys up, my wyf, my love, my lady free!
That in a morning unto his May says he:	That in a morwe unto his May seith he:
In his garden, and no one (there) but those two,	In his gardyn, and no wight but they tweye,
Through incitement of his wife, to enjoy himself	Thurgh eggyng of his wyf, hym for to pleye
That January has caught so great a desire,	That Januarie hath caught so greet a wil,
But now to purpose: before eight days	But now to purpos: er that dayes eighte
Where no one could have found such a trick.	Ther no wight koude han founde out swich a sleighte.
They are agreed, whispering through a wall,	They been accorded, rownynge thurgh a wal,
Though they were kept full long strictly in every way,	Thogh they were kept ful longe streite overal,
By Pyramus and Thisbe can one learn;	By Piramus and Tesbee may men leere;
That Love will not find it out in some manner?	That Love nyl fynde it out in som manere?
What trick is it, though (finding) it be long and painful,	What sleighte is it, thogh it be long and hoot,
O noble Ovid, full truth sayest thou, God knows,	O noble Ovyde, ful sooth seystou, God woot,
Which you shall hear, if you will abide.	Which ye shul heeren, if ye wole abyde.
There is no more to say, but hastily	Ther nys namoore to seye, but hastily
The latchkey counterfeited secretly.	The cliket countrefeted pryvely.
And Damian, who knew all her plan,	And Damyan, that knew al hire entente,
By which into his garden often he went;	By which into his gardyn ofte he wente;
That January carried of the small gate,	That Januarie bar of the smale wyket,
In warm wax has made an impression of the latchkey	In warm wex hath emprented the clyket
This fresh May, whom I spoke of formerly,	This fresshe May, that I spak of so yoore,
To overlook (trouble) is an advantage, I say no more.	Passe over is an ese, I sey namoore.
That confidently suppose indeed that it is not so.	That wenen wisly that it be nat so.
For all that ever he could peer or pry,	For al that evere he koude poure or pryen,
Lo, Argus, who had a hundred eyes,	Lo, Argus, which that hadde an hondred yen,
As to be deceived when a man can see.	As to be deceyved whan a man may se.
For it is as good to be deceived when blind	For as good is blynd deceyved be
Though thou could see as far as ships sail?	Thogh thou myghtest se as fer as shippes saille?
O January, what might it thee avail,	O Januarie, what myghte it thee availle,
And she knew also the aim of his plan.	And she knew eek the fyn of his entente.
And secret signs he knew what she meant,	And privee signes wiste he what she mente,
But nevertheless, by writing to and fro	But nathelees, by writyng to and fro
Without January's hearing it,	But if that Januarie moste it heere,
Regarding his purpose, of any such matter,	As to his purpos, of no swich mateere,
Could he speak one word to fresh May,	Ne myghte he speke a word to fresshe May,
That ever was, for neither night nor day	That evere was, for neither nyght ne day
Is become the most sorrowful man	Bicomen is the sorwefulleste man
Upon that other side Damian	Upon that oother syde Damyan
She expects that her heart would burst.	She wayteth whan hir herte wolde breste.
Or else she must have him as she wishes.	Or elles she moot han hym as hir leste.
That she must either die suddenly	That she moot outher dyen sodeynly
For which full often weeps fresh May,	For which ful ofte wepeth fresshe May,
Unless he had a hand always on her;	But if that he had hond on hire alway;
He would suffer her to ride or walk,	He nolde suffre hire for to ryde or go,
Nor in any other place, no longer,	Ne in noon oother place, neverthemo,
That neither in hall, nor in any other house,	That neither in halle, n' yn noon oother hous,
Which jealousy was so excessive	Which jalousye it was so outrageous
From being more jealous all the time;	That he nas jalous everemoore in oon;
Except that, no doubt, he can not refrain	Save, out of doute, he may nat forgoon
He patiently accepted his adversity,	He paciently took his adversitee,
His sorrow abated, truth to say;	His sorwe gan aswage, sooth to seye;
But at the last, after a month or two,	But atte laste, after a month or tweye,
Solitary as the turtledove that lost has her mate.	Soul as the turtle that lost hath hire make.
But ever live as widow in clothes black,	But evere lyve as wydwe in clothes blake,
Would he that she were neither lover nor wife,	Ne wolde he that she were love ne wyf,
For neither after his death nor in his life	For neither after his deeth nor in his lyf
That some man both her and him had slain.	That som man bothe hire and hym had slayn.
So burned his heart that he sincerely wished	So brente his herte that he wolde fayn
Lest that his wife should fall in some folly,	Lest that his wyf sholde falle in som folye,
He weeps and he wails pitifully;	He wepeth and he wayleth pitously;
Is grown blind, and that all suddenly.	Is woxen blynd, and that al sodeynly.
Amid his pleasure and his prosperity,	Amydde his lust and his prosperitee,
Alas, this noble generous January,	Allas, this noble Januarie free,
For sorrow of which he desires to die.	For sorwe of which desireth he to dyen.
And now thou hast deprived him of both his eyes,	And now thou hast biraft hym bothe his yen,
Thou who had received him for thy closest friend ?	That haddest hym for thy fulle freend receyved?
Why hast thou January thus deceived,	Why hastow Januarie thus deceyved,
That thou deceivest both high and low (everyone)!	That thou deceyvest bothe moore and lesse!
O monster, that so subtly can disguise	O monstre, that so subtilly kanst peynte
O brittle joy! O sweet venom deceitful!	O brotil joye! O sweete venym queynte!
Thy tail is death, through thy poisoning.	Thy tayl is deeth, thurgh thyn envenymynge.
That flatter with thy head when thou wilt sting;	That flaterest with thyn heed whan thou wolt stynge;
Similar to the scorpion so deceitful,	Lyk to the scorpion so deceyvable,
O sudden chance! O thou Fortune unstable!	O sodeyn hap! O thou Fortune unstable!
To January, nor to any creature.	To Januarie, ne to no creature.
But worldly joy can not always endure	But worldly joye may nat alwey dure
Lived this January and fresh May.	Lyved this Januarie and fresshe May.
He in the garden performed and accomplished them.	He in the gardyn parfourned hem and spedde.
And things which that were not done abed,	And thynges whiche that were nat doon abedde,
And May his wife, and no one but those two;	And May his wyf, and no wight but they two;
In summer season, thither would he go,	In somer seson, thider wolde he go,
And when he would pay his wife her marital debt	And whan he wolde paye his wyf hir dette
With which, when he desired, he unlocked it.	With which, whan that hym leste, he it unshette.
He bore always of silver a latchkey,	He baar alwey of silver a clyket,
Save he himself; for of the small gate	Save he hymself; for of the smale wyket
That he will no one allow to bear the key	That he wol no wight suffren bere the keye
This noble knight, this January the old,	This noble knyght, this Januarie the olde,
About that well, and danced, as men told.	Aboute that welle, and daunced, as men tolde.
Amused themselves and made melody	Disporten hem and maken melodye
Proserpine, and all their fairies,	Proserpina, and al hire fayerye,
Very often he, Pluto, and his queen,	Ful ofte tyme he Pluto and his queene,
That stood under a laurel always green.	That stood under a laurer alwey grene.
The beauty of the garden and the well	The beautee of the gardyn and the welle
Though he be god of gardens, to tell	Though he be god of gardyns, for to telle
Nor Priapus could not be adequate,	Ne Priapus ne myghte nat suffise,
That he who wrote the Romance of the Rose	That he that wroot the Romance of the Rose
For, beyond doubt, I truly suppose	For, out of doute, I verraily suppose
So fair a garden know I anywhere none.	So fair a gardyn woot I nowher noon.
He made a garden, walled all with stone;	He made a gardyn, walled al with stoon;
Amongst others of his suitable things,	Amonges othere of his honeste thynges,
To his degree was made as is a king's.	To his degree was maked as a kynges.
His lodging, his clothing, as suitably	His housynge, his array, as honestly
Arranged for himself to live full voluptuously.	Shoop hym to lyve ful deliciously.
In a respectable manner, as is suitable to a knight,	In honest wyse, as longeth to a knyght,
Consists of delight, and therefore certainly he,	Stant in delit, and therfore certeyn he,
Some clerks maintain that felicity	Somme clerkes holden that felicitee
And in my tale forth I will proceed.	And in my tale forth I wol procede.
Thus leave I Damian going about his business,	Thus lete I Damyan aboute his nede,
And fully in his lady's favor he stood.	And fully in his lady grace he stood.
That every one is eager to speak good of him,	That every wight is fayn to speke hym good,
(For craft is all, whoever can do it)	(For craft is al, whoso that do it kan)
He is so pleasant unto every man	He is so plesant unto every man
As ever did a dog trained to hunt with an archer.	As evere dide a dogge for the bowe.
He does all that his lady desires and pleases,	He dooth al that his lady lust and lyketh,
He combs himself, he preens and neatens himself,	He kembeth hym, he preyneth hym and pyketh,
All passed was his sickness and his sorrow.	Al passed was his siknesse and his sorwe.
Up rises Damian the next morning;	Up riseth Damyan the nexte morwe;
To January, when he for her sent.	To Januarie, whan that he for hire sente.
And bade him be all healthy, and forth she went	And bad hym been al hool, and forth she wente
So secretly that no one knew of it,	So secrely that no wight of it wiste,
She takes him by the hand and hard him squeezes	She taketh hym by the hand and harde hym twiste
Under his pillow; let him read it if he wishes.	Under his pilwe; rede it if hym leste.
To visit this Damian goes May,	To visite this Damyan gooth May,
And when she saw her time, upon one day	And whan she saugh hir tyme, upon a day
For it shall be right as he will devise.	For it shal be right as he wole devyse.
Where she might satisfy his desires,	Wher that she myghte unto his lust suffise,
There lacks nothing but only day and place	Ther lakketh noght oonly but day and place
In which she grants him her true grace.	In which she graunteth hym hire verray grace.
In her own hand a letter made she,	Right of hire hand a lettre made she,
This gentle May, filled full of pity,	This gentil May, fulfilled of pitee,
And care not to be a homicide.	And rekke nat to been an homycide.
Well rather than have granted him her grace,	Wel rather than han graunted hym hire grace,
Who would have let him die in the place	Which wolde han lat hym sterven in the place
Who has a heart as hard as any stone,	That hath an herte as hard as any stoon,
Some tyrant is, as there be many a one	Som tyrant is, as ther be many oon
In women is, when they carefully deliberate a matter.	In wommen is, whan they hem narwe avyse.
Here can you see what excellent generosity	Heere may ye se how excellent franchise
Lo, pity runs soon in gentle heart!	Lo, pitee renneth soone in gentil herte!
Though he had no more than his shirt."	Though he namoore hadde than his sherte."
To love him best of any creature,	To love hym best of any creature,
"Certainly," thought she, "whomever this thing may displease	"Certeyn," thoghte she, "whom that this thyng displese
The thought to comfort him.	The remembrance for to doon hym ese.
That from her heart she can not drive	That from hire herte she ne dryve kan
Of pity for this sick Damian	Of pitee of this sike Damyan
Has taken such impression that day	Hath take swich impression that day
But truth is this, how this fresh May	But sooth is this, how that this fresshe May
May he judge of all, for I will hold my peace.	He deme of al, for I wole holde my pees.
That knows that no act is without cause,	That knoweth that noon act is causelees,
I can not say; but great God above,	I kan nat seye; but grete God above,
For every thing has time, as say these clerks --	For alle thyng hath tyme, as seyn thise clerkes --
Was to present a petition concerning Venus' works --	Was for to putte a bille of Venus werkes --
The heaven stood that time that it fortunate	The hevene stood that tyme fortunaat
Or configuration of the stars, that in such a state	Or constellacion, that in swich estaat
Were it by astronomical influence or by nature,	Were it by influence or by nature,
Were it by destiny or by chance,	Were it by destynee or by aventure,
Until bell for evening prayers rang and they had to arise.	Til evensong rong and that they moste aryse.
But here I let them work in their way	But heere I lete hem werken in hir wyse
Or whether she thought it paradise or hell.	Or wheither hire thoughte it paradys or helle.
But lest that prudish folk be with me wroth,	But lest that precious folk be with me wrooth,
And she obeys, whether she wants to or not.	And she obeyeth, be hire lief or looth.
He said her clothes got in his way,	He seyde hir clothes dide hym encombraunce,
He would of her, he said, have some pleasure;	He wolde of hire, he seyde, han som plesaunce;
Straightway he prayed her to strip herself all naked;	Anon he preyde hire strepen hire al naked;
Who slept until the cough has him awaked.	That sleep til that the coughe hath hym awaked.
Down by old January she lay,	Adoun by olde Januarie she lay,
Who is perplexed now but fair fresh May?	Who studieth now but faire fresshe May?
And in the privy softly threw it.	And in the pryvee softely it caste.
And when she of this letter has taken heed,	And whan she of this bille hath taken heede,
Where you know that every person must go by necessity;	Ther as ye woot that every wight moot neede;
She pretended that she must go	She feyned hire as that she moste gon
And laid him down to sleep, and that straightway.	And leyde hym doun to slepe, and that anon.
He takes her, and kisses her full often,	He taketh hire, and kisseth hire ful ofte,
Who on his bed's side sits full softly.	That on his beddes syde sit ful softe.
But unto January come is she,	But unto Januarie ycomen is she,
And went her way; you get no more from me.	And wente hire wey; ye gete namoore of me.
This purse has she within her bosom hidden	This purs hath she inwith hir bosom hyd
"Mercy! And (I ask) that you not discover me,	"Mercy! And that ye nat discovere me,
And softly to her right thus said he:	And softely to hire right thus seyde he:
Save that he sighs wonderfully deep and sore,	Save that he siketh wonder depe and soore,
Has put into her hand, without (doing) more,	Hath put into hire hand, withouten moore,
In which he had written his desire,	In which that he ywriten hadde his wille,
In a secret way his purse and also his letter,	In secree wise his purs and eek his bille,
This Damian, when he saw his opportunity,	This Damyan, whan that his tyme he say,
Comforting him as graciously as she can.	Confortynge hym as goodly as she may.
Down by his bed's side sits she then,	Doun by his beddes syde sit she than,
This fresh May has held straight her way	This fresshe May hath streight hir wey yholde
And told him certain things, what he wanted.	And tolde hym certeyn thynges, what he wolde.
A squire, that was master of ceremonies of his hall,	A squier, that was marchal of his halle,
And with that word he began to him to call	And with that word he gan to hym to calle
Until you sleep fast by my side."	Til that ye slepe faste by my syde."
And hurry yourself, for I will wait	And spede yow faste, for I wole abyde
When I have done nothing but rested myself a little;	Have I no thyng but rested me a lite;
And tell him that I will him visit,	And telleth hym that I wol hym visite,
Cheer him up -- he is a gentle man;	Dooth hym disport -- he is a gentil man;
When you have been in chamber out of this hall,	Whan ye han been in chambre out of this halle,
At after-dinner you with all your women,	At after-mete ye with youre wommen alle,
"My Lady," said this January, "take good heed,	"Dame," quod this Januarie, "taak good hede,
His squire, for it was a gentle deed.	His squier, for it was a gentil dede.
He would so comfort in sickness	He wolde so conforten in siknesse
That of his goodness and his graciousness	That of his bountee and his gentillesse
And for that word every man blessed him,	And for that word hym blessed every man,
To do him all the comfort that I can."	To doon hym al the confort that I kan."
I will myself visit him, and also May,	I wol myself visite hym, and eek May,
And to be a worthy man right able.	And for to been a thrifty man right able.
And moreover manly, and also willing to serve,	And therto manly, and eek servysable,
As any man I know of his rank,	As any man I woot of his degree,
He is as wise, discreet, and as circumspect	He is as wys, discreet, and as secree
If he died, it would be a harm and a pity.	If that he deyde, it were harm and routhe.
"He is a gentle squire, by my troth!	"He is a gentil squier, by my trouthe!
"I am sorry about that," said this January,	"That me forthynketh," quod this Januarie,
No other cause might make him tarry.	Noon oother cause myghte make hym tarye.
Which prevented him from doing his duties;	Which letted hym to doon his bisynesse;
His squires, who stood there beside,	His squieres, whiche that stooden ther bisyde,
Is he always sick, or how can this happen?"	Is he ay syk, or how may this bityde?"
That Damian does not attend on me?	That Damyan entendeth nat to me?
And said, "Saint Mary! how can this be,	And seyde, "Seynte Marie! how may this be,
Remembered this Damian,	Remembred hym upon this Damyan,
And so befell that this good man	And so bifel how that this goode man
As fresh as is the bright summer's day.	As fressh as is the brighte someres day.
In hall this January and May sit,	In halle sit this Januarie and May,
When the high mass was done,	Whan that the heighe masse was ydoon,
Are passed; then let her go to feast.	Ypassed been; thanne lat hire go to feeste.
Until four days, or three days at the least,	Til dayes foure, or thre dayes atte leeste,
A bride shall not eat in the hall	A bryde shal nat eten in the halle
As custom is unto these nobles all.	As custume is unto thise nobles alle.
So long has May in her chamber abided,	So longe hath Mayus in hir chambre abyden,
In two degrees of Taurus, was into Cancer glided;	In two of Tawr, was into Cancre glyden;
That January has wedded fresh May	That Januarie hath wedded fresshe May
The moon, that was at noon that same day	The moone, that at noon was thilke day
He has put it, and laid it at his heart.	He hath it put, and leyde it at his herte.
Unto his fair, fresh lady May;	Unto his faire, fresshe lady May;
In the manner of a poetic lament or a song,	In manere of a compleynt or a lay,
And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,	And in a lettre wroot he al his sorwe,
But secretly a writing set he borrowed,	But prively a penner gan he borwe,
No longer could he in this way endure,	No lenger myghte he in this wise endure,
For which he put his life at risk.	For which he putte his lyf in aventure.
So burns that he dies for desire,	So brenneth that he dyeth for desyr,
This sick Damian in Venus' fire	This sike Damyan in Venus fyr
God be thy help! I can no better say."	God be thyn helpe! I kan no bettre seye."
Tell thy woe? She will always say nay.	Telle thy wo? She wole alwey seye nay.
How shalt thou to thy lady, fresh May,	How shaltow to thy lady, fresshe May,
Answer to my question, in this case.	Andswere to my demaunde, as in this cas.
I say, "O innocent Damian, alas!	I seye, "O sely Damyan, allas!
Therefore I speak to him in this manner:	Therfore I speke to hym in this manere:
That languishes for love, as you shall hear;	That langwissheth for love, as ye shul heere;
Now will I speak of woeful Damian,	Now wol I speke of woful Damyan,
Be it of fish, or bird, or beast, or man.	Be it of fyssh, or bryd, or beest, or man.
This is to say, no living creature,	This is to seyn, no lyves creature,
For every labor sometime must have rest,	For every labour somtyme moot han reste,
As is the best usage of wives.	As usage is of wyves for the beste.
Held her chamber until the fourth day,	Heeld hire chambre unto the fourthe day,
Up rises January; but fresh May	Up ryseth Januarie; but fresshe May
And afterwards, when he saw his time,	And afterward, whan that he saugh his tyme,
And down he laid his head and slept until nine.	And doun he leyde his heed and sleep til pryme.
Now day is come, I can no longer remain awake."	Now day is come, I may no lenger wake."
Then said he thus, "My rest will I take;	Thanne seide he thus, "My reste wol I take;
She rates his playing not worth a bean.	She preyseth nat his pleyyng worth a bene.
When she saw him sitting up in his shirt,	Whan she hym saugh up sittynge in his sherte,
But God knows what May thought in her heart,	But God woot what that May thoughte in hir herte,
While he sang, so chants he and croaks.	Whil that he sang, so chaunteth he and craketh.
The slack skin about his neck shakes	The slakke skyn aboute his nekke shaketh
And full of chatter as a spotted magpie.	And ful of jargon as a flekked pye.
He was frisky as a colt, full of wantonness,	He was al coltissh, ful of ragerye,
And kissed his wife, and acted lecherously.	And kiste his wyf, and made wantown cheere.
And after that he sang full loud and clear,	And after that he sang ful loude and cleere,
And upright in his bed then sits he,	And upright in his bed thanne sitteth he,
Thus labors he until the day dawned;	Thus laboureth he til that the day gan dawe;
For we have leave by the law to enjoy ourselves."	For we han leve to pleye us by the lawe."
Nor hurt himself with his own knife,	Ne hurte hymselven with his owene knyf,
A man can do no sin with his wife,	A man may do no synne with his wyf,
For in our acts we can do no sin.	For in oure actes we mowe do no synne.
And blessed be the yoke that we are in,	And blessed be the yok that we been inne,
In true wedlock we two are coupled,	In trewe wedlok coupled be we tweye,
It does not matter how long we play;	It is no fors how longe that we pleye;
This will be done at leisure perfectly.	This wol be doon at leyser parfitly.
"There is no workman, whosoever he be,	"Ther nys no werkman, whatsoevere he be,
But nevertheless, consider this," said he,	But nathelees, considereth this," quod he,
Before the time comes that I will down descend.	Er tyme come that I wil doun descende.
To you, my spouse, and you greatly offend	To yow, my spouse, and yow greetly offende
And said thus, "Alas! I must do injury	And seyde thus, "Allas! I moot trespace
He rubs her about her tender face,	He rubbeth hire aboute hir tendre face,
For he was all freshly shaved in his fashion --	For he was shave al newe in his manere --
Like to the skin of a shark, sharp as brier --	Lyk to the skyn of houndfyssh, sharp as brere --
With thick bristles of his beard rough,	With thikke brustles of his berd unsofte,
His fresh May, his paradise, his mate.	His fresshe May, his paradys, his make.
And January has fast in arms taken	And Januarie hath faste in armes take
Out of the chamber has every one gone,	Out of the chambre hath every wight hym dressed,
And when the bed was by the priest blessed,	And whan the bed was with the preest yblessed,
The bride was brought to bed as still as stone;	The bryde was broght abedde as stille as stoon;
Men drink and draw the curtain (dividing the room) straightway.	Men drynken and the travers drawe anon.
And they have done right as he will command.	And they han doon right as he wol devyse.
Have all this house emptied in courteous manner."	Lat voyden al this hous in curteys wyse."
"For God's love, as soon as it can be done,	"For Goddes love, as soone as it may be,
To eat them all he was not at all averse.	To eten hem alle he nas no thyng eschu.
Has written in his book "Concerning Intercourse";	Hath writen in his book De Coitu;
Such as the cursed monk, Dan Constantine,	Swiche as the cursed monk, daun Constantyn,
And many a very fine aphrodisiac has he,	And many a letuarie hath he ful fyn,
With hot spices to increase his desire;	Of spices hoote t' encreessen his corage;
He drinks mulled wine, claret, and strong white wine	He drynketh ypocras, clarree, and vernage
Would go to bed; he would no longer tarry.	Wolde go to bedde; he wolde no lenger tarye.
Soon after that, this hasty January	Soone after that, this hastif Januarie
And when they see their time, go to rest.	And whan they sye hir tyme, goon to reste.
Home to their houses cheerfully they ride,	Hoom to hir houses lustily they ryde,
From January, with thanks on all sides.	Fro Januarie, with thank on every syde.
For which departed is this cheerful crowd	For which departed is this lusty route
Did overspread the hemisphere about;	Gan oversprede the hemysperie aboute;
Night with its mantle, that is dark and rude,	Night with his mantel, that is derk and rude,
On the horizon, in that latitude.	On th' orisonte, as in that latitude.
No longer can its body sojourn	No lenger may the body of hym sojurne
The sun has completed his daily journey;	Parfourned hath the sonne his ark diurne;
Than a foe in thy household always in thy presence.	Than hoomly foo al day in thy presence.
God grant thee thy foe in thy household to espy!	God graunte thee thyn hoomly fo t' espye!
Intends to do thee villainy.	Entendeth for to do thee vileynye.
Thine own squire and thy servant from birth,	Thyn owene squier and thy borne man,
In marriage, see how thy Damian,	In mariage, se how thy Damyan,
O January, drunk with pleasure	O Januarie, dronken in plesaunce
God protect us all from your acquaintance!	God shilde us alle from youre aqueyntaunce!
Like to the sly untrue adder in one's bosom,	Lyk to the naddre in bosom sly untrewe,
O servant traitor, false domestic servant,	O servant traytour, false hoomly hewe,
O enemy in one's household, that offers his service!	O famulier foo, that his servyce bedeth!
Until fresh May will rue on his pain.	Til fresshe May wol rewen on his peyne.
But there I let him weep enough and complain	But there I lete hym wepe ynogh and pleyne
No more of him at this time speak I,	Namoore of hym at this tyme speke I,
And to his bed he went hastily.	And to his bed he wente hym hastily.
As she carried it dancing in her hand;	As that she bar it daunsynge in hire hond;
So sorely has Venus hurt him with her torch,	So soore hath Venus hurt hym with hire brond,
Almost he fainted and swooned where he stood,	Almoost he swelte and swowned ther he stood,
That for the very pain he was nearly crazy.	That for the verray peyne he was ny wood.
He was so ravished on his lady May	He was so ravysshed on his lady May
All but a squire, called Damian,	Al but a squyer, highte Damyan,
And full of joy and bliss is every man --	And ful of joye and blisse is every man --
And spiced cakes all about the house they passed,	And spices al aboute the hous they caste,
And after that men dance and drink deeply,	And after that men daunce and drynken faste,
The time came that it was reasonable to rise;	The tyme cam that resoun was to ryse;
To hasten them from the dinner in subtle manner.	To haste hem fro the mete in subtil wyse.
As he best could, so far as good manners allowed,	As he best myghte, savynge his honour,
And finally he takes all possible pains,	And finally he dooth al his labour,
I would that all this people were gone."	I wolde that al this peple were ago."
Now would God that it were become night,	Now wolde God that it were woxen nyght,
But God forbid that I did all my might!	But God forbede that I dide al my myght!
I am afraid you shall not be able to endure it.	I am agast ye shul it nat susteene.
All my desire, it is so sharp and keen!	Al my corage, it is so sharp and keene!
Now would God you might well endure	Now wolde God ye myghte wel endure
And thought, "Alas! O tender creature,	And thoughte, "Allas! O tendre creature,
That that same night he must offend her,	That thilke nyght offenden hire moste he,
But nevertheless yet had he great pity	But nathelees yet hadde he greet pitee
Harder than ever Paris did Helen of Troy.	Harder than evere Parys dide Eleyne.
But in his heart he began to menace her	But in his herte he gan hire to manace
At every time he looked on her face;	At every tyme he looked on hir face;
This January is ravished in a trance	This Januarie is ravysshed in a traunce
Filled with all beauty and delight.	Fulfild of alle beautee and plesaunce.
That she was like the bright morning of May,	That she was lyk the brighte morwe of May,
But thus much of her beauty tell I can,	But thus muche of hire beautee telle I may,
I can not describe to you all her beauty.	I may yow nat devyse al hir beautee.
On Ahasuerus, so meek a look has she.	On Assuer, so meke a look hath she.
Queen Esther looked never with such an eye	Queene Ester looked nevere with swich an ye
May, that sits with so benign a manner,	Mayus, that sit with so benyngne a chiere,
If I lie or not in this matter.	If that I lye or noon in this matiere.
Try it yourself; then can you know	Assayeth it youreself; thanne may ye witen
There is such mirth that it can not be written.	Ther is swich myrthe that it may nat be writen.
When tender youth has wedded stooping age,	Whan tendre youthe hath wedded stoupyng age,
To describe this marriage.	For to descryven of this mariage.
Too small is both thy pen, and also thy tongue,	To smal is bothe thy penne, and eek thy tonge,
And of the songs that the Muses sang!	And of the songes that the Muses songe!
Of her, Philology, and him, Mercury,	Of hire Philologie and hym Mercurie,
Hold thou thy peace, thou poet Martianus Capella,	Hoold thou thy pees, thou poete Marcian,
Saw never in his life so merry a wedded man.	Saugh nevere his lyf so myrie a wedded man.
Hymen, that god of wedding is,	Ymeneus, that god of weddyng is,
And certainly, I dare right well say this,	And certeinly, I dar right wel seyn this,
Dances before the bride and all the company.	Daunceth biforn the bryde and al the route.
And with her torch in her hand about	And with hire fyrbrond in hire hand aboute
In liberty, and also in marriage;	In libertee, and eek in mariage;
And would test his spirit both	And wolde bothe assayen his corage
For January had become her knight	For Januarie was bicome hir knyght
Bacchus pours them the wine all around,	Bacus the wyn hem shynketh al aboute,
At Thebes when the city was in danger.	At Thebes whan the citee was in doute.
Nor that Theodomas, yet half so clear	Nor he Theodomas, yet half so cleere
That never trumpeted Joab to be heard,	That nevere tromped Joab for to heere,
At every course then came loud minstrelsy	At every cours thanne cam loud mynstralcye
Made never such a melody.	Ne maden nevere swich a melodye.
That Orpheus, nor Amphioun of Thebes,	That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphioun,
Before them stood instruments of such sound	Biforn hem stoode instrumentz of swich soun
The most delicious of all Italy.	The mooste deyntevous of al Ytaille.
All full of joy and bliss is the palace,	Al ful of joye and blisse is the paleys,
With other worthy folk upon the dais.	With othere worthy folk upon the deys.
And at the feast sits he and she	And at the feeste sitteth he and she
Thus are they wedded with solemnity,	Thus been they wedded with solempnitee,
And made all secure enough with holiness.	And made al siker ynogh with hoolynesse.
And makes the sign of the cross over them, and prayed God should them bless,	And croucheth hem, and bad God sholde hem blesse,
And said his prayers, as is the usage,	And seyde his orisons, as is usage,
In wisdom and in faithfulness of marriage;	In wysdom and in trouthe of mariage;
And commanded her to be like Sarah and Rebecca	And bad hire be lyk Sarra and Rebekke
To receive the holy sacrament (of marriage).	For to receyve the hooly sacrement.
That to the church both are they went	That to the chirche bothe be they went
But finally the day is come	But finally ycomen is the day
Or to hear of her rich array.	Or for to herknen of hir riche array.
By which she was endowed with his land,	By which that she was feffed in his lond,
If I told you of every legal document and bond	If I yow tolde of every scrit and bond
I believe it would be too long to delay you,	I trowe it were to longe yow to tarie,
Shall wedded be unto this January.	Shal wedded be unto this Januarie.
As hastily as ever that she might	As hastily as evere that she myghte
They worked so, by sly and wise negotiation,	They wroghten so, by sly and wys tretee,
For when they saw that it must necessarily be,	For whan they saughe that it moste nedes be,
Have taken their leave, and each of them of other.	Han take hir leve, and ech of hem of oother.
And with this word this Justin and his brother	And with this word this Justyn and his brother
Now farewell. God have you in his grace."	Fareth now wel. God have yow in his grace."
Declared has full well in little space.	Declared hath ful wel in litel space.
Of marriage, which we have in hand,	Of mariage, which we have on honde,
The Wife of Bath, if you have understood her,	The Wyf of Bathe, if ye han understonde,
But let us wade out of this matter.	But lat us waden out of this mateere.
My tale is done, for my wit is thin.	My tale is doon, for my wit is thynne.
And that you keep yourself also from other sin.	And that ye kepe yow eek from oother synne.
And that you please her not too amorously,	And that ye plese hire nat to amorously,
The pleasures of your wife moderately,	The lustes of youre wyf attemprely,
Providing that you use, as is proper and reasonable,	So that ye use, as skile is and reson,
That shall keep you from your salvation,	That yow shal lette of youre savacion,
In marriage, nor never more shall be,	In mariage, ne nevere mo shal bee,
That there is not so great felicity	That ther nys no so greet felicitee
I hope to God, hereafter shall you know	I hope to God, herafter shul ye knowe
Then shall your soul up to heaven skip	Thanne shal youre soule up to hevene skippe
She may be God's instrument and God's whip;	She may be Goddes meene and Goddes whippe;
Perhaps she may be your purgatory!	Paraunter she may be youre purgatorie!
Despair you not, but have in your memory,	Dispeire yow noght, but have in youre memorie,
And therefore, sir -- the best advice I know --	And therfore, sire -- the beste reed I kan --
Well more often than a single man!	Wel ofte rather than a sengle man!
A wedded man grace to repent himself	A wedded man hym grace to repente
And else, God forbid that he should not send	And elles, God forbede but he sente
In which you say there is no woe nor strife.	In which ye seyn ther is no wo ne stryf.
That, before you have your rite of holy church (last sacrament),	That, er ye have youre right of hooly chirche,
And of his mercy may so for you work	And of his mercy may so for yow wirche
Other than this, God by his high miracle	Oother than this, God of his hygh myracle
But said, "Sir, providing there be no obstacle	But seyde, "Sire, so ther be noon obstacle
He would cite no authority,	He wolde noon auctoritee allegge,
And because he would his long tale abridge,	And for he wolde his longe tale abregge,
Answered straight away in his mockery;	Answerde anon right in his japerye;
Justinus, who hated his folly,	Justinus, which that hated his folye,
Resolve this problem, I pray."	Assoilleth me this question, I preye."
Come to the bliss where Christ eternally lives?	Come to the blisse ther Crist eterne on lyve ys?
As all wedded men do with her wives,	As alle wedded men doon with hire wyvys,
How should I then, who live in such pleasure	How sholde I thanne, that lyve in swich plesaunce
With tribulation and great penance,	With tribulacion and greet penaunce,
For since that true heaven is bought so dear	For sith that verray hevene is boght so deere
That I shall have my heaven here in earth.	That I shal have myn hevene in erthe heere.
So pleasing, without woe and strife,	So delicat, withouten wo and stryf,
That I shall lead now so merry a life,	That I shal lede now so myrie a lyf,
That ever I am frightened now in my old age	That evere I am agast now in myn age
Yet is there such perfect felicity	Yet is ther so parfit felicitee
And also from every branch of that same tree (of sin),	And eek from every branche of thilke tree,
For though he keep him from the seven sins,	For though he kepe hym fro the synnes sevene,
This is to say, in earth and also in heaven.	This is to seye, in erthe and eek in hevene.
There can no man have perfect blisses two --	Ther may no man han parfite blisses two --
"I have," said he, "heard said, full long ago,	"I have," quod he, "herd seyd, ful yoore ago,
Which I will tell in your presence.	The which I wol reherce in youre presence.
Save one thing sticks in my conscience,	Save o thyng priketh in my conscience,
"Then there is," said he, "nothing that can displease me,	"Thanne is," quod he, "no thyng may me displese,
And arrange that he fail not to succeed;	And shapen that he faille nat to spede;
And prayed them to labor in this need,	And preyed hem to laboure in this nede,
So that no one shall share his bliss.	That no wight his blisse parten shal.
And thanked God that he might have her entirely,	And thanked God that he myghte han hire al,
To lead in ease and holiness his life;	To lede in ese and hoolynesse his lyf;
Which maid, he said, he would have as his wife,	Which mayde, he seyde, he wolde han to his wyf,
Her youth and her beauty are enough for him .	Suffiseth hym hir yowthe and hir beautee.
Even though she was of low rank;	Al were it so she were of smal degree;
Who for beauty had great renown,	Which that of beautee hadde greet renoun,
And true ground of his prosperity.	And verray ground of his prosperitee.
Which purpose was pleasing to God, said he,	Which purpos was plesant to God, seyde he,
Against the purpose which he has taken,	Agayn the purpos which that he hath take,
That none of them make any arguments	That noon of hem none argumentes make
And first of all he asked them all a favor,	And alderfirst he bad hem alle a boone,
Placebo came, and also his friends quickly,	Placebo cam, and eek his freendes soone,
He had decided on whom he would settle.	He was apoynted ther he wolde abyde.
He needs no more to travel about;	Nedeth namoore for hym to go ne ryde;
He would abridge their labor, one and all.	He wolde abregge hir labour, alle and some.
And prayed them to do him that pleasure,	And preyed hem to doon hym that plesaunce,
His friends sent he to, at his request,	His freendes sente he to, at his instaunce,
Against his choice; this was his fantasy.	Agayn his choys; this was his fantasye.
That it would be impossible to reply	That inpossible it were to repplye
He thought each other man's wit so bad	Hym thoughte ech oother mannes wit so badde
For when he himself had decided,	For whan that he hymself concluded hadde,
He thought his choice could not be bettered.	Hym thoughte his choys myghte nat ben amended.
And when he on her had decided,	And whan that he on hire was condescended,
Her womanly bearing, and her seriousness.	Hir wommanly berynge, and hire sadnesse.
Her small waist, her arms long and slender,	Hir myddel smal, hire armes longe and sklendre,
Her fresh beauty and her tender age,	Hir fresshe beautee and hir age tendre,
He portrayed in his heart and in his thought	He purtreyed in his herte and in his thoght
And when he was in his bed brought,	And whan that he was in his bed ybroght,
For love is blind always, and can not see.	For love is blynd alday, and may nat see.
And chose her by his own authority;	And chees hire of his owene auctoritee;
And let all others from his heart go,	And leet alle othere from his herte goon,
He at the last decided upon one,	He atte laste apoynted hym on oon,
But nevertheless, between earnestness and joking (in every way),	But nathelees, bitwixe ernest and game,
That of the people greatest praise has she;	That of the peple grettest voys hath she;
For her seriousness and her goodness	For hire sadnesse and hire benyngnytee
Another stands so in the people's good opinion	Another stant so in the peples grace
For if that one have beauty in her face,	For if that oon have beaute in hir face,
He knew not on which he might settle.	He wiste nat wher that he myghte abyde.
About maidens which dwelt nearby him.	Of maydens whiche that dwelten hym bisyde.
Did January within his thought imagine	Gan Januarie inwith his thoght devyse
By his mirror; and in the same manner	By his mirour; and in the same wyse
Then should he see full many a figure pace	Thanne sholde he se ful many a figure pace
As if one took a mirror, polished bright,	As whoso tooke a mirour, polisshed bryght,
There passes through his heart night after night,	Ther passeth thurgh his herte nyght by nyght,
Many a fair shape and many a fair visage	Many fair shap and many a fair visage
Of January concerning his marriage.	Of Januarie aboute his mariage.
From day to day became fixed in the soul	Fro day to day gan in the soule impresse
Exaggerated imagination and constant thought	Heigh fantasye and curious bisynesse
Be wedded when he pleased and where he would.	Be wedded whanne hym liste and where he wolde.
And are agreed fully that he should	And been assented fully that he sholde
And with that word they rise immediately,	And with that word they rysen sodeynly,
"I say it is a cursed man," said he,	"I seye it is a cursed man," quod he,
To my purpose. Placebo, what say you?"	To my purpos. Placebo, what sey ye?"
As thou hast heard, assented right now	As thou hast herd, assenteden right now
For academic talk. Wiser men than thou,	Of scole-termes. Wyser men than thow,
I would not give a bread basket full of herbs	I counte nat a panyer ful of herbes
Straw for thy Seneca, and for thy proverbs!	Straw for thy Senek, and for thy proverbes!
"Well," said this January, "and hast thou spoken?	"Wel," quod this Januarie, "and hastow ysayd?
I pray you that you be not displeased."	I prey yow that ye be nat yvele apayd."
A wife requires constant attention.	A wyf axeth ful many an observaunce.
You shall not please her fully years three --	Ye shul nat plesen hire fully yeres thre --
To have his wife alone. Trust me,	To han his wyf allone. Trusteth me,
Is busy enough to bring it about	Is bisy ynough to bryngen it aboute
The youngest man that is in all this company	The yongeste man that is in al this route
By him that made water, earth, and air,	By hym that made water, erthe, and air,
And especially with a young wife and a fair.	And namely with a yong wyf and a fair.
How that you enter into marriage,	How that ye entren into mariage,
Consider -- you are a man of advanced age --	Avyseth yow -- ye been a man of age --
You may, for me, do just as you like;	Ye mowe, for me, right as yow liketh do;
And also the meekest one that bears life;	And eek the mekeste oon that bereth lyf;
Say that I have the most steadfast wife,	Seyn that I have the mooste stedefast wyf,
And especially many a crowd of women,	And namely of wommen many a route,
And yet, God knows, my neighbors about,	And yet, God woot, my neighebores aboute,
And duties, of all blisses bare.	And observances, of alle blisses bare.
Certainly I find in it nothing but cost and care	Certein I fynde in it but cost and care
Praise whosoever will a wedded man's life,	Preyse whoso wole a wedded mannes lyf,
Full privately, since I have had a wife.	Ful pryvely, syn I have had a wyf.
For, God it knows, I have wept many a tear	For, God it woot, I have wept many a teere
More good personal qualities than her bad vices;	Mo goode thewes than hire vices badde;
With any wife, (to learn) if it so were that she had	With any wyf, if so were that she hadde
But nevertheless it ought enough suffice	But nathelees it oghte ynough suffise
No man, nor beast, such as men could imagine;	Ne man, ne beest, swich as men koude devyse;
Any in this world that is perfect in everything,	Noon in this world that trotteth hool in al,
Although it is so that no man shall find	Al be it so that no man fynden shal
Or rich, or poor, or else man-crazy.	Or riche, or poore, or elles mannyssh wood.
A scold, or waster of thy goods,	A chidestere, or wastour of thy good,
Or proud, or else otherwise a shrew,	Or proud, or elles ootherweys a shrewe,
One must inquire -- this is my opinion --	Men moste enquere -- this is myn assent --
To take a wife without deliberation.	To take a wyf withouten avysement.
I warn you well, it is no child's play	I warne yow wel, it is no childes pley
To whom I give my body for always.	To whom I yeve my body for alwey.
Well much more I ought to consider	Wel muchel moore I oghte avysed be
To whom I give my goods away from me,	To whom I yeve my good awey fro me,
And since I ought to consider very carefully	And syn I oghte avyse me right wel
To whom he gives his land or his moveable possessions.	To whom he yeveth his lond or his catel.
Says that a man ought very carefully consider	Seith that a man oghte hym right wel avyse
Since you have spoken, and hear what I say.	Syn ye han seyd, and herkneth what I seye.
"Now, brother mine, be patient, I pray,	"Now, brother myn, be pacient, I preye,
Right in this manner he to Placebo answered:	Right in this wise he to Placebo answerde:
Justinus, that always still sat and listened,	Justinus, that ay stille sat and herde,
For finally I consider it for the best."	For finally I holde it for the beste."
Do now in this matter exactly as you please,	Dooth now in this matiere right as yow leste,
Your heart hangs on a jolly pin (is very merry)!	Youre herte hangeth on a joly pyn!
To take a young wife; by my father's kin,	To take a yong wyf; by my fader kyn,
By any man that is advanced in age	Of any man that stapen is in age
Christ considers himself by this counsel very well pleased.	Crist halt hym of this conseil ful wel apayd.
Nor in Italy, that could have spoken better!	Ne in Ytaille, that koude bet han sayd!
By God, there is no man in all this town,	By God, ther nys no man in al this toun,
All your words and your opinion.	Youre wordes alle and youre opinioun.
That I consent and confirm every bit	That I consente and conferme everydeel
Such high good judgment, so piously and well,	So heigh sentence, so holily and weel,
You have yourselves showed here to-day	Ye han youreselven shewed heer to-day
Nay, lords are no fools, by my faith!	Nay, lordes been no fooles, by my fay!
That his counsel should surpass his lord's judgment.	That his conseil sholde passe his lordes wit.
That serves any lord of high honor,	That serveth any lord of heigh honour,
A full great fool is any counselor	A ful greet fool is any conseillour
I say the same, or else something similar.	I seye the same, or elles thyng semblable.
What he says, I consider it unshakably true;	What that he seith, I holde it ferme and stable;
I know well that my lord knows more than I.	I woot wel that my lord kan moore than I.
I never contradicted them, truly;	I nevere hem contraried, trewely;
Yet had I never with any of them disagreement.	Yet hadde I nevere with noon of hem debaat.
Among lords of very high rank;	Abouten lordes of ful heigh estaat;
I have stood in very high degree	I have stonden in ful greet degree
I have now been a courtier all my life,	I have now been a court-man al my lyf,
For, brother mine, of me take this advice:	For, brother myn, of me taak this motyf:
I hold your own counsel is the best.	I holde youre owene conseil is the beste.
As surely as God my soul may bring to rest,	So wysly God my soule brynge at reste,
My own dear brother and my lord,	Myn owene deere brother and my lord,
But though Solomon spoke such a word,	But though that Salomon spak swich a word,
`And then shalt thou not repent.'	`And thanne shaltow nat repente thee.'
`Do everything according to good advice,' thus said he,	`Wirk alle thyng by conseil,' thus seyde he,
This word said he unto us every one:	This word seyde he unto us everychon:
That it does not please you, for your high prudence,	That yow ne liketh, for youre heighe prudence,
Except that you are so full of wisdom	But that ye been so ful of sapience
To ask counsel of any that is here,	Conseil to axe of any that is heere,
Full little need had you, my lord so dear,	Ful litel nede hadde ye, my lord so deere,
Placebo said, "O January, brother,	Placebo seyde, "O Januarie, brother,
Justinus truly was called that other.	Justinus soothly called was that oother.
Of whom that one was called Placebo;	Of whiche that oon was cleped Placebo;
There befell a strife betwixt his two brothers,	Ther fil a stryf bitwixe his bretheren two,
Between friends in disputation,	Bitwixen freendes in disputisoun,
But at the last, shortly to say,	But atte laste, shortly for to seyn,
Somme blamed it, some praised it, certainly,	Somme blamed it, somme preysed it, certeyn,
Of marriage many old examples.	Of mariage manye ensamples olde.
Diverse men diversely him told	Diverse men diversely hym tolde
I pray you to my will you will assent."	I prey yow to my wyl ye wole assente."
And since you have heard all my intention,	And syn that ye han herd al myn entente,
As laurel through the year is to be seen.	As laurer thurgh the yeer is for to sene.
My heart and all my limbs are as green	Myn herte and alle my lymes been as grene
I feel me nowhere white-haired but on my head;	I feele me nowhere hoor but on myn heed;
That blossoms before the fruit is grown;	That blosmeth er that fruyt ywoxen bee;
Though I be white-haired, I fare as does a tree	Though I be hoor, I fare as dooth a tree
I know myself best what I can do.	I woot myselven best what I may do.
To do all that is proper to a man;	To do al that a man bilongeth to;
I feel my limbs strong and sufficient	I feele my lymes stark and suffisaunt
For -- God be thanked! -- I dare make boast	For -- God be thanked! -- I dar make avaunt
But sirs, by your leave, that am not I.	But sires, by youre leve, that am nat I.
And live in celibacy full piously.	And lyve in chastitee ful holily.
In distress, as a sister shall the brother,	In meschief, as a suster shal the brother,
And yield their marital debt when it is due;	And yelde hir dette whan that it is due;
And so that they should abstain from lechery,	And for they sholde leccherye eschue,
And not only for sexual passion or love;	And nat oonly for paramour or love;
Of children to the honor of God above,	Of children to th' onour of God above,
For the sake of lawful procreation	By cause of leveful procreacioun
Let him take him a wife with great devotion,	Take hym a wyf with greet devocioun,
If he can not live his life chastely,	If he ne may nat lyven chaast his lyf,
For which causes man should take a wife.	For whiche causes man sholde take a wyf.
Who knows no more of it than my servant boy knows	That woot namoore of it than woot my page
One should wed, and furthermore know I	Men sholde wedde, and forthermoore woot I
I am not in my dotage; I know the cause why	I dote nat; I woot the cause why
In a stranger's hand, and this I tell you all.	In straunge hand, and this I telle yow alle.
Than that my heritage should fall	Than that myn heritage sholde falle
Yet I would rather hounds had eaten me	Yet were me levere houndes had me eten
Nor any children should I upon her beget;	Ne children sholde I none upon hire geten;
And go straight to the devil when I die.	And go streight to the devel whan I dye.
Then I should lead my life in adultery	Thanne sholde I lede my lyf in avoutrye
That I in her could have no pleasure,	That I in hire ne koude han no plesaunce,
I will no old wife have at all for this reason.	I wol noon oold wyf han right for this cause.
Therefore I tell you plainly, in brief,	Wherfore I sey yow pleynly, in a clause,
Just as one can mold warm wax with hands.	Right as men may warm wex with handes plye.
But certainly, one can guide a young thing,	But certeynly, a yong thyng may men gye,
A woman of many schools is half a clerk.	Womman of manye scoles half a clerk is.
For various schools make clever clerks;	For sondry scoles maken sotile clerkis;
That with them should I never live in rest.	That with hem sholde I nevere lyve in reste.
Do so much harm, when they please,	So muchel broken harm, whan that hem leste,
They know so much trickery on Wade's boat,	They konne so muchel craft on Wades boot,
It is but dry bean-stalks and coarse fodder.	It is but bene-straw and greet forage.
I want no woman thirty years of age;	I wol no womman thritty yeer of age;
And better than old beef is the tender veal.	And bet than old boef is the tendre veel.
Better is," said he, "a pike than a pickerel (young pike),	Bet is," quod he, "a pyk than a pykerel,
Old fish and young flesh would I gladly have.	Oold fissh and yong flessh wolde I have fayn.
She shall not pass twenty years, certainly;	She shal nat passe twenty yeer, certayn;
I will no old wife have in any way.	I wol noon oold wyf han in no manere.
"But one thing warn I you, my friends dear,	"But o thyng warne I yow, my freendes deere,
Than I, and where it would be best to ally myself (marry).	Than I, and where me best were to allyen.
But forasmuch as you are more than I,	But forasmuche as ye been mo than I,
To whom I may be wedded hastily.	To whom I may be wedded hastily.
And I will attempt to discover, on my side,	And I wol fonde t' espien, on my syde,
Right away, for I will not delay;	Al sodeynly, for I wol nat abyde;
I pray yow, prepare for my marriage	I prey yow, shapeth for my mariage
Unto some maid fair and tender of age,	Unto som mayde fair and tendre of age,
And that at once in all the haste I can (do it).	And that anoon in al the haste I kan.
For I will be, certainly, a wedded man,	For I wol be, certeyn, a wedded man,
Blessed be God that it shall be amended!	Blessed be God that it shal been amended!
Upon my soul somewhat must I think.	Upon my soule somwhat moste I thynke.
And almost, God knows, on my grave's brink;	And almoost, God woot, on my pittes brynke;
He said, "Friends, I am white-haired and old,	He seyde, "Freendes, I am hoor and oold,
With serious face his tale he has them told.	With face sad his tale he hath hem toold.
To tell them the substance of his intention.	To tellen hem th' effect of his entente.
And for his friends on a day he sent,	And for his freendes on a day he sente,
That is in honey-sweet marriage,	That is in mariage hony-sweete,
The pleasing life, the virtuous quiet,	The lusty lyf, the vertuous quyete,
Considered has, in his old age,	Considered hath, inwith his dayes olde,
And especially upon the wife's side.	And namely upon the wyves syde.
They are so knit together no harm can there befall,	They been so knyt ther may noon harm bityde,
Of worldly folk hold the secure way;	Of worldly folk holden the siker weye;
Husband and wife, however much men may jest or play,	Housbonde and wyf, what so men jape or pleye,
Cherish thy wife, or thou shalt never prosper.	Cherisse thy wyf, or thou shalt nevere thee.
He nurtures it, and therefore I bid thee	He fostreth it, and therfore bidde I thee
No man hates his flesh, but in his life	No man hateth his flessh, but in his lyf
If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wife;	If thou lovest thyself, thou lovest thy wyf;
Love well thy wife, as Christ loved his church.	Love wel thy wyf, as Crist loved his chirche.
Where there is no wife to keep the house.	Ther as ther nys no wyf the hous to kepe.
Well may the sick man bewail and weep,	Wel may the sike man biwaille and wepe,
A wife is keeper of thy household;	A wyf is kepere of thyn housbondrye;
And yet she will (seem to) obey by way of courtesy.	And yet she wole obeye of curteisye.
She shall command, and thou shalt submit to it,	She shal comande, and thou shalt suffren it,
Submit to thy wife's tongue, as Cato bids;	Suffre thy wyves tonge, as Catoun bit;
As says Seneca, above a humble wife.	As seith Senek, above an humble wyf.
There is no thing superior (in degree of virtue),	Ther nys no thyng in gree superlatyf,
To be exalted by Ahasuerus.	Of Assuere enhaunced for to be.
By good counsel delivered out of woe	By good conseil delyvered out of wo
Should have been slain; and look, Esther also	Sholde han be slayn; and looke, Ester also
Saved her husband Nabal when he	Saved hir housbonde Nabal whan that he
Lo Abigail, by good counsel how she	Lo Abigayl, by good conseil how she
And slew that Holofernes, while he slept.	And slow hym Olofernus, whil he slepte.
By wise counsel she God's people kept,	By wys conseil she Goddes peple kepte,
Lo Judith, as the story also can tell,	Lo Judith, as the storie eek telle kan,
For which his father's blessing he won.	For which his fadres benyson he wan.
Bound the kid's skin about his neck,	Boond the kydes skyn aboute his nekke,
Lo, how Jacob, as these clerks tell,	Lo, how that Jacob, as thise clerkes rede,
Do always as women will advise thee.	Do alwey so as wommen wol thee rede.
For which, if thou will act like a wise man,	For which, if thou wolt werken as the wyse,
They are so true and therewithal so wise;	They been so trewe and therwithal so wyse;
Then may he boldly bear up his head,	Thanne may he boldely beren up his heed,
Providing that he work according to his wife's advice.	So that he werke after his wyves reed.
He may not be deceived, as I guess,	He may nat be deceyved, as I gesse,
For then his life is set in security;	For thanne his lyf is set in sikernesse;
A wife to last unto his life's end.	A wyf to laste unto his lyves ende.
To thank his God that has sent him a wife,	Thanken his God that hym hath sent a wyf,
Upon his bare knees ought all his life	Upon his bare knees oughte al his lyf
That every man that considers himself worth a leek	That every man that halt hym worth a leek
And so commended and approved also	And so commended and appreved eek
Thou art so merry, and also so virtuous,	Thou art so murye, and eek so vertuous,
O blissful order of wedlock precious,	O blisful ordre of wedlok precious,
"Do this," says he; "All ready, sir," says she.	"Do this," seith he; "Al redy, sire," seith she.
She says not once "nay," when he says "yea."	She seith nat ones "nay," whan he seith "ye."
All that her husband desires, well pleases her;	Al that hire housbonde lust, hire liketh weel;
If he be poor, she helps him to work;	If he be povre, she helpeth hym to swynke;
There can no tongue tell, nor heart think.	Ther may no tonge telle, or herte thynke.
The bliss that is betwixt them two	The blisse which that is bitwixe hem tweye
That has a wife? Certainly, I can not say.	That hath a wyf? Certes, I kan nat seye.
How could a man have any adversity	How myghte a man han any adversitee
A wife! A, Saint Mary, bless me!	A wyf! a, Seinte Marie, benedicite!
Has but one heart, in prosperity and in distress.	Hath but oon herte, in wele and in distresse.
One flesh they are, and one flesh, as I guess,	O flessh they been, and o fleesh, as I gesse,
They must necessarily live in unity.	They moste nedes lyve in unitee.
His earthly paradise, and his source of consolation.	His paradys terrestre, and his disport.
That wife is man's help and his comfort,	That wyf is mannes helpe and his confort,
Here can you see, and hereby can you prove,	Heere may ye se, and heerby may ye preve,
Like to himself"; and then he made him Eve.	Lyk to hymself"; and thanne he made him Eve.
"Let us now make a helper for this man	"Lat us now make an helpe unto this man
God of his great goodness said then,	God of his grete goodnesse seyde than,
And saw him all alone, stark naked,	And saugh him al allone, bely-naked,
The high God, when he had made Adam,	The hye God, whan he hadde Adam maked,
That woman is created for man's help.	That womman is for mannes helpe ywroght.
I speak of folk in secular life.	I speke of folk in seculer estaat.
He lives helpless and all desolate --	He lyveth helplees and al desolat --
He who has no wife, I consider him ruined;	He which that hath no wyf, I holde hym shent;
Marriage is a full great sacrament.	Mariage is a ful greet sacrement.
Well longer than thou will wish, indeed.	Wel lenger than thee list, paraventure.
A wife will last, and in thy house endure,	A wyf wol laste, and in thyn hous endure,
But doubt not, if I shall speak plainly:	But drede nat, if pleynly speke I shal:
That pass like a shadow upon a wall.	That passen as a shadwe upon a wal.
Or personal possessions -- all are gifts of Fortune	Or moebles -- alle been yiftes of Fortune
All other sorts of gifts certainly,	Alle othere manere yiftes hardily,
A wife is God's gift truly;	A wyf is Goddes yifte verraily;
Defy Theofrastus, and listen to me.	Deffie Theofraste, and herke me.
But take no heed of all such foolishness;	But take no kep of al swich vanytee;
Writes this man, may God his bones curse!	Writeth this man, ther God his bones corse!
This opinion, and a hundred things worse,	This sentence, and an hundred thynges worse,
Full easily canst thou be a cuckold."	Ful lightly maystow been a cokewold."
And if thou take a wife unto thy household	And if thou take a wyf unto thyn hoold
To inherit thy goods and has done so many a day.	After thy good and hath doon many a day.
Thy real friends, or a true servant,	Thy verray freendes, or a trewe knave,
And if thou be sick, as God may save me,	And if thou be syk, so God me save,
For she will claim half part all her life.	For she wol clayme half part al hir lyf.
To guard thy goods than thine own wife,	Thy good to kepe than thyn owene wyf,
A true servant does more diligence	A trewe servant dooth moore diligence
As to economize in thy household expenditures.	As for to spare in houshold thy dispence.
"Take no wife," said he, "for managing the household,	"Ne take no wyf," quod he, "for housbondrye,
What does it matter though Theofrastus wants to lie?	What force though Theofraste liste lye?
Of which that Theofrastus is one of those.	Of whiche he Theofraste is oon of tho.
Though he lie bedridden until he dies.	Though that he lye bedrede til he sterve.
She is not weary of loving and serving him,	She nys nat wery hym to love and serve,
For happiness or woe she will not forsake him;	For wele or wo she wole hym nat forsake;
To care for him, sick and well, as is his mate?	To kepe hym, syk and hool, as is his make?
Who is so true, and also so eager	Who is so trewe, and eek so ententyf
For who can be so obedient as a wife?	For who kan be so buxom as a wyf?
Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound,	Wel may his herte in joy and blisse habounde,
Bound under this yoke of marriage.	Under this yok of mariage ybounde.
Lives a blissful and orderly life	Lyveth a lyf blisful and ordinaat
In liberty and under no restraint,	In libertee and under noon arreest,
They live but as a bird or as a beast,	They lyve but as a bryd or as a beest,
They find when they expect security.	They fynde whan they wene sikernesse.
On brittle ground they build, and insecurity	On brotel ground they buylde, and brotelnesse
That bachelors have often pain and woe;	That bacheleris have often peyne and wo;
And truly it is fitting to be thus,	And trewely it sit wel to be so,
In love, which is nothing but childish vanity.	In love, which nys but childyssh vanytee.
When they find any adversity	Whan that they fynden any adversitee
Whereas these bachelors sing "alas,"	Where as thise bacheleris synge "allas,"
On which he might engender himself an heir,	On which he myghte engendren hym an heir,
Then should he take a young wife and a fair,	Thanne sholde he take a yong wyf and a feir,
Then is a wife the best part of his treasure.	Thanne is a wyf the fruyt of his tresor.
And especially when a man is old and white-haired;	And namely whan a man is oold and hoor;
To take a wife it is a glorious thing,	To take a wyf it is a glorious thyng,
And certainly, as truly as God is king,	And certeinly, as sooth as God is kyng,
Thus said this old knight, who was so wise.	Thus seyde this olde knyght, that was so wys.
That in this world it is a paradise."	That in this world it is a paradys."
For wedlock is so easy and so pure,	For wedlok is so esy and so clene,
With which God first bound man and woman.	With which that first God man and womman bond.
And to live under that holy bond	And for to lyve under that hooly boond
That is between a husband and his wife,	That is bitwixe an housbonde and his wyf,
Might once know of that blissful life	Mighte ones knowe of thilke blisful lyf
Praying our Lord to grant him that he	Preyinge oure Lord to graunten him that he
To discover where he might wedded be,	T' espien where he myghte wedded be,
That day and night he does all he can	That day and nyght he dooth al that he kan
Had this knight to be a wedded man	Hadde this knyght to been a wedded man
I can not say, but such a great desire	I kan nat seye, but swich a greet corage
And when he was passed sixty years,	And whan that he was passed sixty yeer,
As do these fools that are secular.	As doon thise fooles that been seculeer.
On women, where was his appetite,	On wommen, ther as was his appetyt,
And followed always his bodily desire	And folwed ay his bodily delyt
And sixty years a wifeless man was he,	And sixty yeer a wyflees man was hee,
In which he lived in great prosperity;	In which he lyved in greet prosperitee;
A worthy knight, who was born in Pavia,	A worthy knyght, that born was of Pavye,
Once there was dwelling in Lombardy	Whilom ther was dwellynge in Lumbardye
Here begins the Merchant's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Marchantes Tale.
"Gladly," said he, "but of my own sorrow,	"Gladly," quod he, "but of myn owene soore,
Full heartily I pray you tell us part."	Ful hertely I pray yow telle us part."
Since you know so much of that art	Syn ye so muchel knowen of that art
"Now," said our Host, "Merchant, as God may you bless,	"Now," quod oure Hoost, "Marchaunt, so God yow blesse,
Could tell of my wife's cursedness!"	Koude tellen of my wyves cursednesse!"
Tell so much sorrow as I now here	Tellen so muchel sorwe as I now heere
Unto the heart, could not in any way	Unto the herte, ne koude in no manere
Wifeless has been, though one would him stab	Wyflees hath been, though that men wolde him ryve
And yet, I believe, he who all his life	And yet, I trowe, he that al his lyve
"A, good sir Host, I have been wedded	"A, goode sire Hoost, I have ywedded bee
God prevent that it should so happen!	God shilde that it sholde so bifalle!
As for the greater part (majority) -- I say not all.	As for the moore part -- I sey nat alle.
That I say truth, by Saint Thomas of India,	That I seye sooth, by Seint Thomas of Ynde,
Try it whoso will, and he shall find	Assaye whoso wole, and he shal fynde
We wedded men live in sorrow and care.	We wedded men lyven in sorwe and care.
I would never again come in the snare.	I wolde nevere eft comen in the snare.
Were I released (from marriage), so may I may prosper,	Were I unbounden, also moot I thee,
And the extreme cruelty of my wife	And of my wyf the passyng crueltee.
There is a long and large difference	Ther is a long and large difference
Her high malice? She is a shrew in every way.	Hir hye malice? She is a shrewe at al.
Why should I tell you in detail	What sholde I yow reherce in special
She would outmatch him, I dare well swear.	She wolde hym overmacche, I dar wel swere.
For though the fiend were married to her,	For thogh the feend to hire ycoupled were,
I have a wife, the worst that can be;	I have a wyf, the worste that may be;
For well I know it fares so with me.	For wel I woot it fareth so with me.
Who are wedded. I believe that it is so,	That wedded been. I trowe that it be so,
Said the Merchant, "and so do many others	Quod the Marchant, "and so doon other mo
"Weeping and wailing, grief and other sorrow	"Wepyng and waylyng, care and oother sorwe
The Prologue of the Merchant's Tale.	The Prologe of the Marchantes Tale.
Here ends the Miller's Tale.	Heere endeth the Millere his Tale.
This tale is done, and God save all this company!	This tale is doon, and God save al the rowte!
And Nicholas is scalded in the rump.	And Nicholas is scalded in the towte.
And Absolon has kissed her lower eye,	And Absolon hath kist hir nether ye,
In spite of all his guarding and his jealousy,	For al his kepyng and his jalousye,
Thus screwed was this carpenter's wife,	Thus swyved was this carpenteris wyf,
And every person did laugh at this strife.	And every wight gan laughen at this stryf.
For every clerk immediately agreed with the other.	For every clerk anonright heeld with oother.
That he was considered crazy in all the town;	That he was holde wood in al the toun;
With oaths great he was so sworn down	With othes grete he was so sworn adoun
It was for naught; no one listened to his explanation,	It was for noght; no man his reson herde.
For whatever this carpenter answered,	For what so that this carpenter answerde,
And turned all his harm into a joke.	And turned al his harm unto a jape.
Into the roof they stare and they gape,	Into the roof they kiken and they cape,
The folk did laugh at his foolishness;	The folk gan laughen at his fantasye;
To sit in the roof, to keep him company.	To sitten in the roof, par compaignye.
And had hanged them in the roof above;	And hadde hem hanged in the roof above;
He had bought himself three kneading tubs,	He hadde yboght hym knedyng tubbes thre,
Because of his imagination that in his foolishness	Thurgh fantasie that of his vanytee
He was so afraid of Nowell's flood	He was agast so of Nowelis flood
They told every one that he was crazy;	They tolden every man that he was wood;
By clever Nicholas and Alisoun.	With hende Nicholas and Alisoun.
For when he spoke, he was immediately put down	For whan he spak, he was anon bore doun
But he had to stand up for himself, though it went badly;	But stonde he moste unto his owene harm;
For with the fall he had broken his arm.	For with the fal he brosten hadde his arm.
Run in to gawk at this man,	In ronnen for to gauren on this man,
The neighbors, both low-ranking and high,	The neighebores, bothe smale and grete,
And cried "Out" and "Help" in the street.	And criden "Out" and "Harrow" in the strete.
Up started Alison and Nicholay,	Up stirte hire Alison and Nicholay,
Upon the floor, and there he lay in a swoon.	Upon the floor, and ther aswowne he lay.
Neither bread nor ale, until he came to the pavement	Ne breed ne ale, til he cam to the celle
And down goes all; he found nothing to sell (wasted no time),	And doun gooth al; he foond neither to selle,
And with his ax he smote the cord in two,	And with his ax he smoot the corde atwo,
He sits up without more words,	He sit hym up withouten wordes mo,
And heard someone cry "water!" as if he were crazy,	And herde oon crien "water!" as he were wood,
This carpenter woke suddenly out of his slumber,	This carpenter out of his slomber sterte,
"Help! Water! Water! Help, for God's heart!"	"Help! Water! Water! Help, for Goddes herte!"
As if he were crazy, for woe he began to cry,	As he were wood, for wo he gan to crye,
And for the pain he thought he would die.	And for the smert he wende for to dye.
The hot plough blade so burned his rump	The hoote kultour brende so his toute,
Off goes the skin a hand's breadth about,	Of gooth the skyn an hande-brede aboute,
And he smote Nicholas in the middle of the ass.	And Nicholas amydde the ers he smoot.
And he was ready with his hot iron,	And he was redy with his iren hoot,
As great as if it had been a thunder-bolt,	As greet as it had been a thonder-dent,
This Nicholas immediately let fly a fart	This Nicholas anon leet fle a fart
"Speak, sweet bird, I know not where thou art."	"Spek, sweete bryd, I noot nat where thou art."
And then spoke this clerk, this Absolon,	And therwith spak this clerk, this Absolon,
Over the buttock, to the thigh;	Over the buttok, to the haunche-bon;
And he puts out his ass stealthily	And out his ers he putteth pryvely
And he opened up the window hastily,	And up the wyndowe dide he hastily,
He should kiss his ass before he escapes.	He sholde kisse his ers er that he scape.
And thought he would make the joke even better;	And thoughte he wolde amenden al the jape;
This will I give thee, if thou kiss me."	This wol I yeve thee, if thou me kisse."
Very fine it is, and also nicely engraved.	Ful fyn it is, and therto wel ygrave.
My mother gave it to me, as God may save me;	My mooder yaf it me, so God me save;
Of gold," said he, "I have brought thee a ring.	Of gold," quod he, "I have thee broght a ryng.
I am thy Absolon, my darling.	I am thyn Absolon, my deerelyng.
"Why, nay," said he, "God knows, my sweet beloved,	"Why, nay," quod he, "God woot, my sweete leef,
That knocks so? I swear it is a thief."	That knokketh so? I warante it a theef."
This Alison answered, "Who is there	This Alison answerde, "Who is ther
Upon the window, just as he did before.	Upon the wyndowe, right as he dide er.
And went unto the carpenter's wall.	And wente unto the carpenteris wal.
Very softly out at the door he began to steal,	Ful softe out at the dore he gan to stele,
And caught the plough blade by the cold handle.	And caughte the kultour by the colde stele.
I shall well tell it to thee to-morrow" --	I shal wel telle it thee to-morwe day" --
"Concerning that," said Absolon, "be as be may.	"Therof," quod Absolon, "be as be may.
Ay, Christ's foe! What will you do with it?"	Ey, Cristes foo! What wol ye do therwith?"
Thou sholdest have it, as I am true smith.	Thou sholdest have, as I am trewe smyth.
Or in a sack countless silver coins,	Or in a poke nobles alle untold,
Gerveys answered, "Certainly, were it gold,	Gerveys answerde, "Certes, were it gold,
Lend it to me; I have something to do with it,	As lene it me; I have therwith to doone,
That hot plough blade in the hearth here,	That hoote kultour in the chymenee heere,
Than Gerveys knew, and said, "Friend so dear,	Than Gerveys knew, and seyde, "Freend so deere,
He had more business on hand	He hadde moore tow on his distaf
For all his joking; no word he gave in reply;	Of al his pley; no word agayn he yaf;
This Absolon cared not a bean	This Absolon ne roghte nat a bene
By Saint Note, you know well what I mean."	By Seinte Note, ye woot wel what I mene."
Hath brought you to be running around like this.	Hath broght yow thus upon the viritoot.
What ails yow? Some pretty girl, God knows it,	What eyleth yow? Som gay gerl, God it woot,
"What, Absolon! for Christ's sweet cross,	"What, Absolon! for Cristes sweete tree,
"What, who art thou?" "It am I, Absolon."	"What, who artow?" "It am I, Absolon."
And said, "Open up, Gerveys, and that right now."	And seyde, "Undo, Gerveys, and that anon."
This Absolon knocked all gently,	This Absolon knokketh al esily,
He sharpens ploughshares and plough blades busily.	He sharpeth shaar and kultour bisily.
Who in his forge made plowing equipment;	That in his forge smythed plough harneys;
To a smith men called dan Gerveys,	Until a smyth men cleped daun Gerveys,
At a slow pace he went down the street	A softe paas he wente over the strete
And wept as does a child that is beaten.	And weep as dooth a child that is ybete.
For he was healed of his malady.	For he was heeled of his maladie.
Love-making he thought not worth not a watercress,	Of paramours he sette nat a kers,
For from that time that he had kissed her ass,	For fro that tyme that he hadde kist hir ers,
His hot love was cold and all extinguished;	His hoote love was coold and al yqueynt;
Alas," said he, "alas, I did not turn away!"	Allas," quod he, "allas, I ne hadde ybleynt!"
"Be avenged for this insult.	"Of this despit awroken for to be.
If I would not rather than (have) all this town," said he,	But me were levere than al this toun," quod he,
"My soul I entrust to Satan,	"My soule bitake I unto Sathanas,
But Absolon, who says very often, "Alas!"	But Absolon, that seith ful ofte, "Allas!"
Who rubs now, who now scrubs his lips	Who rubbeth now, who froteth now his lippes
And to himself he said, "I shall pay thee back."	And to hymself he seyde, "I shal thee quyte."
And on his lip he began for anger to bite,	And on his lippe he gan for anger byte,
This hapless Absolon heard every bit,	This sely Absolon herde every deel,
"By God's body, this goes fair and well."	"By Goddes corpus, this goth faire and weel."
"A beard! A beard!" said clever Nicholas,	"A berd! A berd!" quod hende Nicholas,
And Absolon goes forth walking sadly.	And Absolon gooth forth a sory pas.
"Tehee!" said she, and clapped the window to,	"Tehee!" quod she, and clapte the wyndow to,
And said, "Fie! alas! what have I done?"	And seyde, "Fy! allas! what have I do?"
For well he knew a woman has no beard.	For wel he wiste a womman hath no berd.
Back he jumped, and thought it was amiss,	Abak he stirte, and thoughte it was amys,
With great relish, before he was aware of this.	Ful savourly, er he were war of this.
But with his mouth he kissed her naked ass	But with his mouth he kiste hir naked ers
And Absolon, to him it happened no better nor worse,	And Absolon, hym fil no bet ne wers,
And at the window out she put her hole,	And at the wyndow out she putte hir hole,
Dark was the night as pitch, or as the coal,	Derk was the nyght as pich, or as the cole,
This Absolon wiped his mouth very dry.	This Absolon gan wype his mouth ful drie.
Lest our neighbors espy thee."	Lest that oure neighebores thee espie."
The window she undoes, and that in haste.	The wyndow she undoth, and that in haste.
Sweetheart, thy grace, and sweet bird, thy mercy!"	Lemman, thy grace, and sweete bryd, thyn oore!"
For after this I hope there comes more.	For after this I hope ther cometh moore.
And said, "I am a lord in every way;	And seyde, "I am a lord at alle degrees;
This Absolon set himself down on his knees	This Absolon doun sette hym on his knees
"Now hush, and thou shalt laugh all thy fill."	"Now hust, and thou shalt laughen al thy fille."
And unto Nicholas she said quietly,	And unto Nicholas she seyde stille,
"Then make thee ready," said she, "I come right now."	"Thanne make thee redy," quod she, "I come anon."
"Yes, certainly, sweetheart," said this Absolon.	"Ye, certes, lemman," quod this Absolon.
For Jesus' love, and for the love of me."	For Jhesus love, and for the love of me."
Then kiss me, since it can be no better,	Thanne kysse me, syn it may be no bet,
That true love was ever in such miserable circumstances!	That trewe love was evere so yvel biset!
"Alas," said Absolon, "and woe is me,	"Allas," quod Absolon, "and weylawey,
And let me sleep, in the name of twenty devils!"	And lat me slepe, a twenty devel wey!"
Go forth thy way, or I will cast a stone,	Go forth thy wey, or I wol caste a ston,
Well better than thee, by Jesus, Absolon.	Wel bet than thee, by Jhesu, Absolon.
I love another -- and else I were to blame --	I love another -- and elles I were to blame --
"So help me God, it will not be `come kiss me.'	"As help me God, it wol nat be `com pa me.'
I can eat no more than a maiden."	I may nat ete na moore than a mayde."
That like a true turtledove is my mourning.	That lik a turtel trewe is my moornynge.
Indeed, sweetheart, I have such love-longing	Ywis, lemman, I have swich love-longynge
I mourn as does a lamb after the tit.	I moorne as dooth a lamb after the tete.
No wonder is though that I swelter and sweat;	No wonder is thogh that I swelte and swete;
That for your love I sweat wherever I go.	That for youre love I swete ther I go.
Well little you think upon my woe,	Wel litel thynken ye upon my wo,
Awake, sweetheart mine, and speak to me!	Awaketh, lemman myn, and speketh to me!
My fair bird, my sweet cinnamon?	My faire bryd, my sweete cynamome?
And softly he coughs with a gentle sound:	And softe he cougheth with a semy soun:
Unto his breast it reached, it was so low --	Unto his brest it raughte, it was so lowe --
And he stands still under the casement window --	And stille he stant under the shot-wyndowe --
He goes to the carpenter's house,	He rometh to the carpenteres hous,
For thus he thought he would be gracious.	For therby wende he to ben gracious.
Under his tongue he had a true-love herb,	Under his tonge a trewe-love he beer,
To smell sweet, ere he had combed his hair.	To smellen sweete, er he hadde kembd his heer.
But first he chews cardamom and licorice,	But first he cheweth greyn and lycorys,
And dresses himself handsomely, in every detail.	And hym arraieth gay, at poynt-devys.
When the first cock has crowed (about midnight), at once	Whan that the firste cok hath crowe, anon
And all the night then will I stay awake and play."	And al the nyght thanne wol I wake and pleye."
Therefore I will go sleep an hour or two,	Therfore I wol go slepe an houre or tweye,
All night I dreamed also I was at a feast.	Al nyght me mette eek I was at a feeste.
That is a sign of kissing at the least.	That is a signe of kissyng atte leeste.
My mouth has itched all this long day;	My mouth hath icched al this longe day;
Some sort of comfort shall I have, by my faith.	Som maner confort shal I have, parfay.
That at the very least I shall her kiss.	That at the leeste wey I shal hire kisse.
My love-longing, for yet I shall not miss	My love-longynge, for yet I shal nat mysse
That stands very low upon his bedroom's wall.	That stant ful lowe upon his boures wal.
Very quietly knock at his window	Ful pryvely knokken at his wyndowe
"As I may prosper, I shall, at cock's crow,	"So moot I thryve, I shal, at cokkes crowe,
About his door, since day began to spring.	Aboute his dore, syn day bigan to sprynge.
For surely I saw him not stirring	For sikirly I saugh hym nat stirynge
And thought, "Now is time to stay awake all night,	And thoghte, "Now is tyme to wake al nyght,
This Absolon very was jolly and happy,	This Absolon ful joly was and light,
Where he may be, I can not truly say."	Where that he be, I kan nat soothly seyn."
Or else he is at his house, certainly.	Or elles he is at his hous, certeyn.
For he is accustomed to go for timber	For he is wont for tymber for to go
For timber, where our abbot has sent him;	For tymber, ther oure abbot hath hym sent;
Since Saturday; I suppose that he is gone	Syn Saterday; I trowe that he be went
And said, "I know not; I have not seen him working here	And seyde, "I noot; I saugh hym heere nat wirche
And he drew him apart out of the church,	And he drough hym apart out of the chirche,
Very discreetly about John the carpenter;	Ful prively after John the carpenter;
And by chance asked a cloistered monk	And axed upon cas a cloisterer
With company, to be merry and amuse himself,	With compaignye, hym to disporte and pleye,
Upon the Monday was at Oseneye	Upon the Monday was at Oseneye
This parish clerk, this amorous Absolon,	This parissh clerk, this amorous Absolon,
And friars in the chapel began to sing.	And freres in the chauncel gonne synge.
Until the bell of the early morning service began to ring,	Til that the belle of laudes gan to rynge,
In business of mirth and of pleasure,	In bisynesse of myrthe and of solas,
And thus lie Alison and Nicholas,	And thus lith Alison and Nicholas,
There was the revel and the sounds of festivity;	Ther was the revel and the melodye;
Where the carpenter is accustomed to lie.	Ther as the carpenter is wont to lye.
Without more words they go to bed,	Withouten wordes mo they goon to bedde,
And Alisoun very quietly down she sped;	And Alisoun ful softe adoun she spedde;
And also he snores, for his head lay wrong.	And eft he routeth, for his heed myslay.
For suffering of his spirit he groans deeply,	For travaille of his goost he groneth soore,
About curfew time, or a little more;	Aboute corfew-tyme, or litel moore;
Fell on this carpenter right, as I guess,	Fil on this carpenter right, as I gesse,
The dead sleep, for weary business,	The dede sleep, for wery bisynesse,
Awaiting the rain, if he might hear it.	Awaitynge on the reyn, if he it heere.
And still he sits, and says his prayer,	And stille he sit, and biddeth his preyere,
This carpenter said his devotion,	This carpenter seyde his devocioun,
And "Quiet!" said John, and "Quiet!" said Alisoun.	And "Clom!" quod John, and "Clom!" seyde Alisoun.
They sat still a good two and one-half minutes.	They seten stille wel a furlong way.
And shortly, up they climbed all three;	And shortly, up they clomben alle thre;
And prepared everything as it should be.	And dressed alle thyng as it sholde be.
He shut his door without candlelight,	He shette his dore withoute candel-lyght,
And on the Monday, when it drew toward night,	And on the Monday, whan it drow to nyght,
Upon his business to go to London.	Upon his nede to London for to go.
He sent his servant, and also his servant girl,	He sente his knave, and eek his wenche also,
But before he had made all this preparation,	But er that he hadde maad al this array,
Sufficing just enough for a day.	Suffisynge right ynogh as for a day.
And provisioned them, both trough and tub,	And hem vitailled, bothe trogh and tubbe,
Unto the tubs hanging in the beams,	Unto the tubbes hangynge in the balkes,
To climb by the rungs and the uprights	To clymben by the ronges and the stalkes
With his own hand he made three ladders,	His owene hand he made laddres thre,
And hanged them in the roof secretly.	And heng hem in the roof in pryvetee.
And secretly he sent them to his dwelling,	And pryvely he sente hem to his in,
And after that a tub and a large vat,	And after that a tubbe and a kymelyn,
He goes and gets him a kneading trough,	He gooth and geteth hym a knedyng trogh,
He sighs with very many a sorry groan;	He siketh with ful many a sory swogh;
To drown Alisoun, his honey dear.	To drenchen Alisoun, his hony deere.
Noah's flood come surging like the sea	Noees flood come walwynge as the see
He thinks truly that he can see	Hym thynketh verraily that he may see
This hapless carpenter begins to tremble;	This sely carpenter bigynneth quake;
So deeply may a mental image be taken.	So depe may impressioun be take.
One can die of imagination,	Men may dyen of ymaginacioun,
Lo, what a great thing is emotion!	Lo, which a greet thyng is affeccioun!
Go, dear spouse, and help to save our lives."	Go, deere spouse, and help to save oure lyf."
I am thy faithful, truly wedded wife;	I am thy trewe, verray wedded wyf;
And said, "Alas! go forth thy way quickly,	And seyde, "Allas! go forth thy wey anon,
But nonetheless she acted as if she would die,	But nathelees she ferde as she wolde deye,
What all this ingenious scheme meant.	What al this queynte cast was for to seye.
And she was aware, and knew it better than he,	And she was war, and knew it bet than he,
And to his wife he told his secret,	And to his wyf he tolde his pryvetee,
Very often he said "Alas and woe is me,"	Ful ofte he seide "Allas and weylawey,"
This hapless carpenter goes forth his way.	This sely carpenter goth forth his wey.
Go, save our life, and that I beseech thee."	Go, save oure lyf, and that I the biseche."
Thou art so wise, one needs not teach thee.	Thou art so wys, it needeth thee nat teche.
To make of this any longer preaching.	To make of this no lenger sermonyng.
Go now thy way; I have no more time	Go now thy wey; I have no lenger space
And sit there, awaiting God's grace.	And sitten there, abidyng Goddes grace.
Into our kneading-tubs will we creep,	Into oure knedyng-tubbes wol we crepe,
Tomorrow at night, when people are all asleep,	Tomorwe at nyght, whan men ben alle aslepe,
This ordinance is said. Go, God give thee success!	This ordinance is seyd. Go, God thee speede!
No more in looking than there shall be in deed.	Namoore in lookyng than ther shal in deede.
So that between yow shall be no sin,	For that bitwixe yow shal be no synne,
"Thy wife and thou must hang far apart,	"Thy wyf and thou moote hange fer atwynne,
Nor call, nor cry, but be in his prayer;	Ne clepe, ne crie, but be in his preyere;
That not one of us speak a word,	That noon of us ne speke nat a word,
On which we are entered onto shipboard,	That we ben entred into shippes bord,
Be well advised on that same night	Be wel avysed on that ilke nyght
"But of one thing I warn thee very sternly:	"But of o thyng I warne thee ful right:
Of all the world, like Noah and his wife.	Of al the world, as Noe and his wyf.
And then shall we be lords all our life	And thanne shul we be lordes al oure lyf
Good morrow, I see thee well, for it is day.'	Good morwe, I se thee wel, for it is day.'
And thou will say, `Hail, master Nicholay!	And thou wolt seyn, `Hayl, maister Nicholay!
Then will I call, `How, Alison! How, John!	Thanne wol I clepe, `How, Alison! How, John!
As does the white duck after her drake.	As dooth the white doke after hire drake.
Then shalt thou float as merry, I guarantee,	Thanne shaltou swymme as myrie, I undertake,
When the great shower is gone away.	Whan that the grete shour is goon away.
That we may freely pass forth on our way,	That we may frely passen forth oure way,
Toward the garden, over the stable,	Unto the gardyn-ward, over the stable,
And break a hole on high, upon the gable,	And breke an hole an heigh, upon the gable,
When the water comes, so that we may go	Whan that the water comth, that we may go
And also an axe to smite the cord in two,	And eek an ax to smyte the corde atwo,
And when thou thus hast done as I have said,	And whan thou thus hast doon as I have seyd,
In a way that no man may espy our preparations.	That no man of oure purveiaunce espye.
Then shalt thou hang them in the roof very high,	Thanne shaltow hange hem in the roof ful hye,
Got us these three kneading tubs,	Ygeten us thise knedyng tubbes thre,
"But when thou hast, for her and thee and me,	"But whan thou hast, for hire and thee and me,
Go now thy way, and speed thee on this business.	Go now thy wey, and speed thee heer-aboute.
Thy wife shall I well save, beyond doubt.	Thy wyf shal I wel saven, out of doute.
To have as great a grace as Noah had.	To han as greet a grace as Noe hadde.
It suffices thee, unless thy wits go mad,	Suffiseth thee, but if thy wittes madde,
Ask not why, for though thou ask me,	Axe nat why, for though thou aske me,
And also thy maid Gille I can not save;	Ne eek thy mayde Gille I may nat save;
But Robin, thy knave, may not know of this,	But Robyn may nat wite of this, thy knave,
About nine a.m. on the next day.	Aboute pryme upon the nexte day.
The water shall recede and go away	The water shal aslake and goon away
But for a day -- fie on the remnant!	But for a day -- fy on the remenant!
And have therein sufficient victuals	And han therinne vitaille suffisant
In which we may float as in a barge,	In which we mowe swymme as in a barge,
For each of us, but see that they be large,	For ech of us, but looke that they be large,
"Right now go bring us quickly into this dwelling	"Anon go gete us faste into this in
Men may not preach nor make tarrying.	Men may nat preche or maken tariyng.
This needs haste, and of a hasty thing	This asketh haste, and of an hastif thyng
And therefore, knowest thou what is best to do?	And therfore, woostou what is best to doone?
That she had had a ship for herself alone.	That she hadde had a ship hirself allone.
At that time, than have all his black sheep	At thilke tyme, than alle his wetheres blake
He would rather, I dare well guarantee,	Hym hadde be levere, I dar wel undertake,
Before he could get his wife onto the ship?	Er that he myghte gete his wyf to shipe?
The sorrow of Noah with his fellowship,	The sorwe of Noe with his felaweshipe,
"Yes indeed," said this Carpenter, "very long ago."	"Yis," quod this Carpenter, "ful yoore ago."
That all the world should be destroyed by water?"	That al the world with water sholde be lorn?"
When our Lord had warned him before	Whan that oure Lord hadde warned hym biforn
Hast thou not heard how Noah was saved,	Hastow nat herd hou saved was Noe,
Yet shall I save her and thee and me.	Yet shal I saven hire and thee and me.
I guarantee, without mast and sail,	I undertake, withouten mast and seyl,
And if thou will act in accordance with good advice,	And if thou werken wolt by good conseil,
`Do all in accordance with good advice, and thou shalt not rue (it).'	`Werk al by conseil, and thou shalt nat rewe.'
For thus says Salomon, which was very true:	For thus seith Salomon, that was ful trewe:
"If thou will act in accordance with learning and (good) advice.	"If thou wolt werken after loore and reed.
"Why, yes indeed, by God," said clever Nicholas,	"Why, yis, for Gode," quod hende Nicholas,
And said, "Is there no remedy in this case?"	And seyde, "Is ther no remedie in this cas?"
For sorrow of this he almost fell down,	For sorwe of this he fil almoost adoun,
And shall she drown? Alas, my Alisoun!"	And shal she drenche? Allas, myn Alisoun!"
This carpenter answered, "Alas, my wife!	This carpenter answerde, "Allas, my wyf!
Thus shall mankind drown, and lose their lives."	Thus shal mankynde drenche, and lese hir lyf."
Shall all be drowned, so hideous is the shower.	Shal al be dreynt, so hidous is the shour.
This world," he said, "in less than an hour	This world," he seyde, "in lasse than an hour
Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and raging	Shal falle a reyn, and that so wilde and wood
That now on Monday next, after midnight,	That now a Monday next, at quarter nyght,
As I have looked on the bright moon,	As I have looked in the moone bright,
I have found in my astrology,	I have yfounde in myn astrologye,
"Now John," said Nicholas, "I will not lie;	"Now John," quod Nicholas, "I wol nat lye;
To child nor wife, by Him that rescued souls from hell!"	To child ne wyf, by hym that harwed helle!"
Say what thou will, I shall never tell it	Sey what thou wolt, I shal it nevere telle
And, though I say it, I do not like to gab.	Ne, though I seye, I nam nat lief to gabbe.
Said then this hapless man, "I am no blabbermouth,	Quod tho this sely man, "I nam no labbe,
That if thou betray me, thou shalt go mad."	That if thou wreye me, thou shalt be wood."
For this vengeance thou shalt have therefore,	For this vengeaunce thou shalt han therfore,
And if thou tell it to anyone, thou art completely lost;	And if thou telle it man, thou art forlore;
For it is Christ's secrets that I say,	For it is Cristes conseil that I seye,
That to no person thou shalt this counsel reveal,	That to no wight thou shalt this conseil wreye,
Thou shalt upon thy pledged word swear to me here	Thou shalt upon thy trouthe swere me heere
He said, "John, my host, beloved and dear,	He seyde, "John, myn hooste, lief and deere,
And the carpenter sat down by him.	And doun the carpenter by hym he sette.
This Nicholas shut fast his door,	This Nicholas his dore faste shette,
And brought of strong ale a large quart;	And broghte of myghty ale a large quart;
This carpenter goes down, and comes again,	This carpenter goth doun, and comth ageyn,
I will tell it to no other man, certainly."	I wol telle it noon oother man, certeyn."
About a certain matter that concerns me and thee.	Of certeyn thyng that toucheth me and thee.
And after will I speak in private	And after wol I speke in pryvetee
This Nicholas answered, "Fetch me drink,	This Nicholas answerde, "Fecche me drynke,
What! Think on God, as we do, men who work."	What! Thynk on God, as we doon, men that swynke."
This carpenter answered, "What sayest thou?	This carpenter answerde, "What seystow?
Shall all the world be lost right now?"	Shal al the world be lost eftsoones now?"
And at the last this clever Nicholas	And atte laste this hende Nicholas
Where went thou, Saint Peter's sister?"	Where wentestow, Seinte Petres soster?"
For evil spirits of the nights, the white pater-noster!	For nyghtes verye, the white pater-noster!
Bless this house from every wicked creature,	Blesse this hous from every wikked wight,
"Jesus Christ and Saint Benedict,	"Jhesu Crist and Seinte Benedight,
And on the threshold of the door outside:	And on the thresshfold of the dore withoute:
On four corners of the house about,	On foure halves of the hous aboute,
Therewith the night-charm he said straightway	Therwith the nyght-spel seyde he anon-rightes
I bless thee from elves and from evil creatures."	I crouche thee from elves and fro wightes."
"What! Nicholay! What, how! What, look down!	"What! Nicholay! What, how! What, looke adoun!
And shook him hard, and cried loudly,	And shook hym harde, and cride spitously,
And seized him by the shoulders vigorously,	And hente hym by the sholdres myghtily,
This carpenter supposed he was in despair,	This carpenter wende he were in despeir,
And ever gaped upward into the air.	And evere caped upward into the eir.
This Nicholas sat ever as still as stone,	This Nicholas sat ay as stille as stoon,
Onto the floor the door fell straightway.	Into the floor the dore fil anon.
And by the hasp he heaved it off at once;	And by the haspe he haaf it of atones;
His servant was a strong fellow for this purpose,	His knave was a strong carl for the nones,
He shall (come) out of his studying, as I guess."	He shal out of his studiyng, as I gesse."
While thou, Robyn, lift up the door.	Whil that thou, Robyn, hevest up the dore.
Get me a staff, that I may pry up from below,	Get me a staf, that I may underspore,
If that I may, by Jesus, heaven's king!	If that I may, by Jhesus, hevene kyng!
He shall be scolded for his studying,	He shal be rated of his studiyng,
I feel very sorry for clever Nicholas.	Me reweth soore of hende Nicholas.
He did not see that. But yet, by Saint Thomas,	He saugh nat that. But yet, by Seint Thomas,
Until he was fallen in a fertilizer pit;	Til he was in a marle-pit yfalle;
Upon the stars, (to find) there what should happen,	Upon the sterres, what ther sholde bifalle,
So fared another clerk with astronomy;	So ferde another clerk with astromye;
Who knows nothing but only his belief!	That noght but oonly his bileve kan!
Yes, blessed be always an unlearned man	Ye, blessed be alwey a lewed man
Men should not know of God's secrets.	Men sholde nat knowe of Goddes pryvetee.
I always thought well how it should be!	I thoghte ay wel how that it sholde be!
In some madness or in some fit.	In some woodnesse or in som agonye.
This man is fallen, because of his astronomy,	This man is falle, with his astromye,
A man knows little what shall happen to him.	A man woot litel what hym shal bityde.
And said, "Help us, Saint Frideswide!	And seyde, "Help us, Seinte Frydeswyde!
In what condition he saw this same man.	In what array he saugh this ilke man.
Down he goes, and told his master immediately	Adoun he gooth, and tolde his maister soone
As if he were gazing on the new moon.	As he had kiked on the newe moone.
This Nicholas sat ever gaping upward,	This Nicholas sat evere capyng upright,
And at the last he had a sight of him.	And at the laste he hadde of hym a sight.
And through that hole he looked in very carefully,	And at that hole he looked in ful depe,
Where the cat was accustomed to creep in,	Ther as the cat was wont in for to crepe,
He found a hole, very low upon a board,	An hole he foond, ful lowe upon a bord,
But all for naught; he heard not a word.	But al for noght; he herde nat a word.
"What, hey! What do you, master Nicholay?	"What, how! What do ye, maister Nicholay?
He cried and knocked as if he were crazy,	He cride and knokked as that he were wood,
And at the chamber door while he stood,	And at the chambre dore whil that he stood,
This servant goes up very resolutely,	This knave gooth hym up ful sturdily,
Look how it is, and tell me quickly."	Looke how it is, and tel me boldely."
"Call at his door, or knock with a stone.	"Clepe at his dore, or knokke with a stoon.
"Go up," he said unto his servant at once,	"Go up," quod he unto his knave anoon,
That just now, on last Monday, I saw him work.	That now, on Monday last, I saugh hym wirche.
I saw today a corpse carried to church	I saugh today a cors yborn to chirche
God forbid that he should suddenly die!	God shilde that he deyde sodeynly!
Things are not right with Nicholas.	It stondeth nat aright with Nicholas.
And said, "I am afraid, by Saint Thomas,	And seyde, "I am adrad, by Seint Thomas,
About Nicholas, or what thing might ail him,	Of Nicholas, or what thyng myghte hym eyle,
This hapless carpenter has great marvel	This sely carpenter hath greet merveyle
Until Sunday, when the sun goes to rest.	Til Sonday, that the sonne gooth to reste.
And ate and slept, or did what he pleased,	And eet and sleep, or dide what hym leste,
That Nicholas still in his chamber lay,	That Nicholas stille in his chambre lay,
This goes on all that same Saturday,	This passeth forth al thilke Saterday,
Because, for no shout could her maid call him,	For, for no cry hir mayde koude hym calle,
She believed that he was ill,	She trowed that he was in maladye,
Of all that day she saw him not with eye;	Of al that day she saugh hym nat with ye;
She should say she knew not where he was;	She sholde seye she nyste where he was;
If he asked about Nicholas,	If that he axed after Nicholas,
And told her to say to her husband,	And to hire housbonde bad hire for to seye,
Both food and drink for a day or two,	Bothe mete and drynke for a day or tweye,
But has carried very quietly unto his chamber	But dooth ful softe unto his chambre carie
This Nicholas no longer would tarry,	This Nicholas no lenger wolde tarie,
For this was his desire and hers also.	For this was his desir and hire also.
She should sleep in his arms all night,	She sholde slepen in his arm al nyght,
And if it so be the game went right,	And if so be the game wente aright,
To beguile this hapless jealous husband;	This sely jalous housbonde to bigyle;
That Nicholas shall devise a trick	That Nicholas shal shapen hym a wyle
Are agreed on this plan,	Acorded been to this conclusioun,
And clever Nicholas and Alisoun	And hende Nicholas and Alisoun
This carpenter was gone to Osenay;	This carpenter was goon til Osenay;
And so it happened on a Saturday,	And so bifel it on a Saterday,
Now bear thyself well, thou clever Nicholas,	Now ber thee wel, thou hende Nicholas,
This nearby Nicholas cast him in the shadow.	This nye Nicholas stood in his light.
Because he was far from her sight,	By cause that he fer was from hire sight,
For though Absolon be crazed or angry,	For though that Absolon be wood or wrooth,
Makes the distant loved one to be disliked."	Maketh the ferre leeve to be looth."
Men say right thus: "Always the nearby sly one	Men seyn right thus: "Alwey the nye slye
Very true is this proverb, it is no lie,	Ful sooth is this proverbe, it is no lye,
And turns all his earnestness into a joke.	And al his ernest turneth til a jape.
And thus she makes Absolon her fool,	And thus she maketh Absolon hire ape,
That Absolon may go whistle;	That Absolon may blowe the bukkes horn;
She so loves this clever Nicholas	She loveth so this hende Nicholas
But what good does it do him in this case?	But what availleth hym as in this cas?
He plays Herod upon a high stage.	He pleyeth Herodes upon a scaffold hye.
Sometimes, to show his agility and skill,	Somtyme, to shewe his lightnesse and maistrye,
And some by force, and some for noble character.	And somme for strokes, and somme for gentillesse.
For some folk will be won for riches,	For som folk wol ben wonnen for richesse,
And, because she was a townie, he offered money;	And, for she was of town, he profred meede;
And wafers, piping hot out of the fire;	And wafres, pipyng hoot out of the gleede;
He sings, trilling like a nightingale;	He syngeth, brokkynge as a nyghtyngale;
And swore he would be her own servant;	And swoor he wolde been hir owene page;
He woos her by go-betweens and agents,	He woweth hire by meenes and brocage,
He combs his flowing locks, and dressed himself elegantly;	He kembeth his lokkes brode, and made hym gay;
He stays awake all the night and all the day;	He waketh al the nyght and al the day;
So woos her that he is in a sorry state.	So woweth hire that hym is wo bigon.
From day to day this elegant Absolon	Fro day to day this joly Absolon
This goes on; what more would you have?	This passeth forth; what wol ye bet than weel?
"Yes indeed, God knows, John, I hear it every bit."	"Yis, God woot, John, I heere it every deel."
That chants thus next to our bedroom's wall?"	That chaunteth thus under oure boures wal?"
"What! Alison! Hearest thou not Absolon,	"What! Alison! Herestow nat Absolon,
And spoke unto his wife, and said at once,	And spak unto his wyf, and seyde anon,
This carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,	This carpenter awook, and herde him synge,
Very well in harmony with his guitar-playing.	Ful wel acordaunt to his gyternynge.
I pray yow that you will have pity on me,"	I praye yow that ye wole rewe on me,"
"Now, dear lady, if it be thy will,	"Now, deere lady, if thy wille be,
He sings in his voice gentle and high,	He syngeth in his voys gentil and smal,
That was upon the carpenter's wall.	That was upon the carpenteris wal.
A little after cocks had crowed,	A litel after cokkes hadde ycrowe,
Until he came to the carpenter's house	Til he cam to the carpenteres hous
And forth he goes, elegant and amorous,	And forth he gooth, jolif and amorous,
For the sake of love he intended to stay awake.	For paramours he thoghte for to wake.
And Absolon his guitar has taken;	And Absolon his gyterne hath ytake;
The moon, when it was night, very brightly shone,	The moone, whan it was nyght, ful brighte shoon,
For courtesy, he said, he would have none.	For curteisie, he seyde, he wolde noon.
That of no wife took he any offering;	That of no wyf took he noon offrynge;
Has in his heart such a love-longing	Hath in his herte swich a love-longynge
And he a cat, he would have grabbed her at once.	And he a cat, he wolde hire hente anon.
I dare well say, if she had been a mouse,	I dar wel seyn, if she hadde been a mous,
She was so attractive and sweet and flirtatious.	She was so propre and sweete and likerous.
To look on her he thought a merry life,	To looke on hire hym thoughte a myrie lyf,
And especially on this carpenter's wife.	And namely on this carpenteris wyf.
And many a lovely look he cast on them,	And many a lovely look on hem he caste,
Censing the wives of the parish eagerly;	Sensynge the wyves of the parisshe faste;
Goes with a censer on the holiday,	Gooth with a sencer on the haliday,
This Absolon, who was elegant and gay,	This Absolon, that jolif was and gay,
But to say the truth, he was somewhat squeamish	But sooth to seyn, he was somdeel squaymous
Where any merry barmaid was.	Ther any gaylard tappestere was.
That he did not visit with his entertainment,	That he ne visited with his solas,
In all the town there was no brew house nor tavern	In al the toun nas brewhous ne taverne
And he could play as well on a guitar.	And as wel koude he pleye on a giterne.
To which he some times sang a loud high treble;	Therto he song som tyme a loud quynyble;
And play songs on a small fiddle,	And pleyen songes on a smal rubible;
And with his legs kick to and fro,	And with his legges casten to and fro,
After the school of Oxford as it was then,	After the scole of Oxenforde tho,
And make a charter of land or a legal release.	And maken a chartre of lond or acquitaunce.
Well could he draw blood, and cut hair and shave,	Wel koude he laten blood, and clippe and shave,
A merry lad he was, so save me God.	A myrie child he was, so God me save.
As white as is the blossom upon the branch.	As whit as is the blosme upon the rys.
And over that he had a gay surplice	And therupon he hadde a gay surplys
Very fair and thick are the laces set.	Ful faire and thikke been the poyntes set.
All in a tunic of a light blue;	Al in a kirtel of a lyght waget;
Clad he was very trimly and properly	Yclad he was ful smal and proprely
In red hose he went elegantly.	In hoses rede he wente fetisly.
His complexion was ruddy, his eyes gray as a goose.	His rode was reed, his eyen greye as goos.
Very straight and even lay his elegant parted hair.	Ful streight and evene lay his joly shode.
And stretched out like a fan large and broad;	And strouted as a fanne large and brode;
Curly was his hair, and as the gold it shone,	Crul was his heer, and as the gold it shoon,
Who was called Absolon.	The which that was ycleped Absolon.
Now was there of that church a parish clerk,	Now was ther of that chirche a parissh clerk,
It was so washed when she left her work.	So was it wasshen whan she leet hir werk.
Her forehead shone as bright as any day,	Hir forheed shoon as bright as any day,
This good wife went on a holiday.	This goode wyf went on an haliday.
Then it thus happened, that to the parish church,	Thanne fil it thus, that to the paryssh chirche,
And plays fast, and makes melody.	And pleyeth faste, and maketh melodie.
He kissed her sweetly and takes his psaltery,	He kiste hire sweete and taketh his sawtrie,
And well patted her about the loins,	And thakked hire aboute the lendes weel,
When Nicholas had done thus every bit	Whan Nicholas had doon thus everideel
To wait for a time, as I have told before.	To wayte a tyme, as I have told biforn.
And thus they are agreed and sworn	And thus they been accorded and ysworn
If he could not outwit a carpenter."	But if he koude a carpenter bigyle."
"A clerk had badly wasted his time (studying),	"A clerk hadde litherly biset his whyle,
"You must been very secret in this matter."	"Ye moste been ful deerne, as in this cas."
I know right well I am as good as dead," said she.	I woot right wel I nam but deed," quod she.
That unless you wait patiently and are secretive,	That but ye wayte wel and been privee,
"My husband is so full of jealousy	"Myn housbonde is so ful of jalousie
When she may well espy her opportunity.	Whan that she may hir leyser wel espie.
That she will be at his commandment,	That she wol been at his comandement,
And swore her oath, by Saint Thomas of Kent,	And swoor hir ooth, by Seint Thomas of Kent,
That she granted him her love at the last,	That she hir love hym graunted atte laste,
And spoke so fair, and pressed his suit so fast,	And spak so faire, and profred him so faste,
Take away your hands, for your courtesy!"	Do wey youre handes, for youre curteisye!"
Or I will cry `out, help' and `alas'!	Or I wol crie `out, harrow' and `allas'!
Why, let me be!" said she. "Let me be, Nicholas,	Why, lat be!" quod she. "Lat be, Nicholas,
And said, "I will not kiss thee, by my faith!	And seyde, "I wol nat kisse thee, by my fey!
And with her head she twisted fast away,	And with hir heed she wryed faste awey,
And she sprang as a colt does when restrained,	And she sproong as a colt dooth in the trave,
Or I will die, so save me God!"	Or I wol dyen, also God me save!"
And said, "Sweetheart, love me immediately	And seyde, "Lemman, love me al atones,
And held her hard by the thigh,	And heeld hire harde by the haunchebones,
And said, "Indeed, unless I have my will,	And seyde, "Ywis, but if ich have my wille,
And intimately he caught her by her crotch,	And prively he caughte hire by the queynte,
For clerks are very subtle and very clever;	As clerkes ben ful subtile and ful queynte;
While her husband was at Oseneye,	Whil that hir housbonde was at Oseneye,
Happened with this young wife to flirt and play,	Fil with this yonge wyf to rage and pleye,
That one day this clever Nicholas	That on a day this hende Nicholas
Now, sir, and again, sir, it so happened	Now, sire, and eft, sire, so bifel the cas
Or yet for any good yeoman to wed.	Or yet for any good yeman to wedde.
For any lord to lay in his bed,	For any lord to leggen in his bedde,
Her shoes were laced high on her legs.	Hir shoes were laced on hir legges hye.
As broad as is the boss of a shield.	As brood as is the boos of a bokeler.
A brooch she wore upon her low collar,	A brooch she baar upon hir lowe coler,
Tall as a mast, and straight as an arrow.	Long as a mast, and upright as a bolt.
Skittish she was, as is a spirited colt,	Wynsynge she was, as is a joly colt,
Or a hoard of apples laid in hay or heather.	Or hoord of apples leyd in hey or heeth.
Her mouth was sweet as ale and honey or mead,	Hir mouth was sweete as bragot or the meeth,
Like any kid or calf following its mother.	As any kyde or calf folwynge his dame.
Moreover she could skip and play,	Therto she koude skippe and make game,
But of her song, it was as loud and lively	But of hir song, it was as loude and yerne
Than the newly minted noble in the Tower.	Than in the Tour the noble yforged newe.
Much brighter was the shining of her complexion	Ful brighter was the shynyng of hir hewe
So lovely a little doll or such a wench.	So gay a popelote or swich a wenche.
There is no man so wise that he could imagine	There nys no man so wys that koude thenche
In all this world, to seek up and down,	In al this world, to seken up and doun,
Tasseled with silk and ornamented with latten "pearls."	Tasseled with silk and perled with latoun.
And by her girdle hung a purse of leather,	And by hir girdel heeng a purs of lether,
And softer than the wool is of a sheep.	And softer than the wolle is of a wether.
She was much more blissful to look upon	She was ful moore blisful on to see
And those were bent and black as any sloe.	And tho were bent and blake as any sloo.
Her two eyebrows were plucked very thin,	Ful smale ypulled were hire browes two,
And surely she had a wanton eye;	And sikerly she hadde a likerous ye;
Her headband broad of silk, and set very high.	Hir filet brood of silk, and set ful hye.
Were of the same color as her collar;	Were of the same suyte of hir coler;
The ribbons of her white cap	The tapes of hir white voluper
With coal-black silk, within and also without.	Of col-blak silk, withinne and eek withoute.
And also behind, around her collar,	And eek bihynde, on hir coler aboute,
Upon her loins, full of many a flounce.	Upon hir lendes, ful of many a goore.
An apron as white as morning milk	A barmclooth as whit as morne milk
A belt she wore, with decorative strips all of silk,	A ceynt she werede, barred al of silk,
As any weasel was her body graceful and slender.	As any wezele hir body gent and smal.
Fair was this young wife, and moreover	Fair was this yonge wyf, and therwithal
He must endure, like other folk, his troubles.	He moste endure, as oother folk, his care.
But since he was fallen in the snare,	But sith that he was fallen in the snare,
For youth and old age are often in conflict.	For youthe and elde is often at debaat.
Men should wed according to their status in life,	Men sholde wedden after hire estaat,
He knew not Cato, for his wit was rude,	He knew nat Catoun, for his wit was rude,
And believed himself likely to be a cuckold.	And demed hymself been lik a cokewold.
For she was wild and young, and he was old	For she was wylde and yong, and he was old
Jealous he was, and held her narrowly in confinement,	Jalous he was, and heeld hire narwe in cage,
She was eighteen years of age.	Of eighteteene yeer she was of age.
Whom he loved more than his life;	Which that he lovede moore than his lyf;
This carpenter had recently wedded a wife,	This carpenter hadde wedded newe a wyf,
Living on his friends' support and his (own) income.	After his freendes fyndyng and his rente.
And thus this sweet clerk spent his time	And thus this sweete clerk his tyme spente
And after that he sang the King's Tune.	And after that he song the Kynges Noote.
And "The Angel to the Virgin" he sang;	And Angelus ad virginem he song;
So sweetly that all the room rang;	So swetely that all the chambre rong;
On which at night he made melody	On which he made a-nyghtes melodie
And all above there lay a fine psaltery,	And al above ther lay a gay sautrie,
His linen press covered with a red woolen cloth;	His presse ycovered with a faldyng reed;
Arranged on shelves at his bed's head;	On shelves couched at his beddes heed;
His counting stones (for his abacus) lie neatly apart,	His augrym stones layen faire apart,
His astrolabe, belonging to his art (of astronomy),	His astrelabie, longynge for his art,
Of licorice or any zedoary (a ginger-like herb).	Of lycorys or any cetewale.
And he himself as sweet as is the root	And he hymself as sweete as is the roote
Very elegantly strewn with sweet-smelling herbs;	Ful fetisly ydight with herbes swoote;
Alone, without any company,	Allone, withouten any compaignye,
A room had he in that hostelry	A chambre hadde he in that hostelrye
And like a maiden meek in appearance.	And lyk a mayden meke for to see.
And moreover he was sly and very discreet,	And therto he was sleigh and ful privee,
Of secret love he knew and of its satisfaction;	Of deerne love he koude and of solas;
This clerk was called clever Nicholas.	This clerk was cleped hende Nicholas.
Or if people asked him what should happen	Or if men asked hym what sholde bifalle
When men should have drought or else showers,	Whan that men sholde have droghte or elles shoures,
If men asked him, in specific (astronomical) hours	If that men asked hym, in certein houres
To determine by scientific calculations,	To demen by interrogaciouns,
And he knew a certain (number of) of astronomical operations,	And koude a certeyn of conclusiouns,
Was turned to learning astrology,	Was turned for to lerne astrologye,
Who had learned the arts curriculum, but all his desire	Hadde lerned art, but al his fantasye
With him there was dwelling a poor scholar,	With hym ther was dwellynge a poure scoler,
And of his craft he was a carpenter.	And of his craft he was a carpenter.
There was once dwelling at Oxford	Whilom ther was dwellynge at Oxenford
Here begins The Miller's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Millere his tale.
And also people should not take a joke too seriously.	And eek men shal nat maken ernest of game.
Think about this, and don't blame me;	Avyseth yow, and put me out of blame;
And ribaldry they told, both of the two.	And harlotrie they tolden bothe two.
So was the Reeve also and many others,	So was the Reve eek and othere mo,
The Miller is a churl; you know this well.	The Millere is a cherl; ye knowe wel this.
Blame not me if you choose amiss.	Blameth nat me if that ye chese amys.
And also morality and holiness.	And eek moralitee and hoolynesse.
For he shall find enough, of every sort,	For he shal fynde ynowe, grete and smale,
Turn over the leaf and choose another tale;	Turne over the leef and chese another tale;
And therefore, whoever does not want to hear it,	And therfore, whoso list it nat yheere,
Or else (I must) falsify some of my material.	Or elles falsen som of my mateere.
All their tales, be they better or worse,	Hir tales alle, be they bettre or werse,
Out of evil intention, but because I must repeat	Of yvel entente, but for I moot reherce
For God's love, think not that I speak	For Goddes love, demeth nat that I seye
And therefore every respectable person I pray,	And therfore every gentil wight I preye,
I regret that I must repeat it here.	M'athynketh that I shal reherce it heere.
He would not refrain from speaking for any man,	He nolde his wordes for no man forbere,
What more should I say, but this Miller	What sholde I moore seyn, but this Millere
Of the rest he needs not enquire."	Of the remenant nedeth nat enquere."
So long as he can find God's plenty there,	So he may fynde Goddes foyson there,
Of God's secrets, nor of his wife.	Of Goddes pryvetee, nor of his wyf.
A husband must not be inquisitive	An housbonde shal nat been inquisityf
I will believe well that I am not one.	I wol bileve wel that I am noon.
As to believe of myself that I were one (a cuckold);	As demen of myself that I were oon;
Take upon me more than enough (trouble),	Take upon me moore than ynogh,
I have a wife, by God, as well as thou;	I have a wyf, pardee, as wel as thow;
Why art thou angry with my tale now?	Why artow angry with my tale now?
Thou knowest that well thyself, unless thou art mad.	That knowestow wel thyself, but if thou madde.
And ever a thousand good against one bad.	And evere a thousand goode ayeyns oon badde.
There are very good wives, many a one,	Ther been ful goode wyves many oon,
But I say not therefore that thou art one;	But I sey nat therfore that thou art oon;
He who has no wife, he is no cuckold.	Who hath no wyf, he is no cokewold.
And said, "Dear brother Oswald,	And seyde, "Leve brother Osewold,
This drunken Miller spoke very quickly in reply	This dronke Millere spak ful soone ageyn
And also to bring wives in such ill fame.	And eek to bryngen wyves in swich fame.
To slander any man, or defame him,	To apeyren any man, or hym defame,
It is a sin and also a great folly	It is a synne and eek a greet folye
Let be thy ignorant drunken ribaldry.	Lat be thy lewed dronken harlotrye.
The Reeve answered and said, "Hold your tongue!	The Reve answerde and seyde, "Stynt thy clappe!
How a clerk has set the carpenter's cap (fooled him)."	How that a clerk hath set the wrightes cappe."
Both of a carpenter and of his wife,	Bothe of a carpenter and of his wyf,
For I will tell a legend and a life	For I wol telle a legende and a lyf
Blame it on ale of Southwerk, I you pray.	Wyte it the ale of Southwerk, I you preye.
That I am drunk; I know it by my sound.	That I am dronke; I knowe it by my soun.
But first I make a protestation	But first I make a protestacioun
"Now listen," said the Miller, "everyone!	"Now herkneth," quod the Millere, "alle and some!
Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."	Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."
Our Host answered, "Tell on, in the devil's name!	Oure Hoost answerde, "Tel on, a devel wey!
For I will speak or else go my way."	For I wol speke or elles go my wey."
"By God's soul," said he, "that will not I;	"By Goddes soule," quod he, "that wol nat I;
Wait, and let us act properly."	Abyd, and lat us werken thriftily."
Some better man shall first tell us another.	Som bettre man shal telle us first another.
Our Host saw that he was drunk on ale,	Oure Hooste saugh that he was dronke of ale,
With which I will now requite the Knight's tale."	With which I wol now quite the Knyghtes tale."
I know a noble tale for this occasion,	I kan a noble tale for the nones,
And swore, "By (Christ's) arms, and by blood and bones,	And swoor, "By armes, and by blood and bones,
But in Pilate's voice he began to cry,	But in Pilates voys he gan to crie,
Nor give preference to any man out of courtesy,	Ne abyde no man for his curteisie,
He would not doff neither hood nor hat,	He nolde avalen neither hood ne hat,
So that he hardly sat upon his horse,	So that unnethe upon his hors he sat,
The Miller, who for drunkenness was all pale,	The Millere, that for dronken was al pale,
Now tell you, sir Monk, if you can,	Now telleth ye, sir Monk, if that ye konne,
For truly the game is well begun.	For trewely the game is wel bigonne.
Let's see now who shall tell another tale;	Lat se now who shal telle another tale;
This goes well; the bag is opened.	This gooth aright; unbokeled is the male.
Our Host laughed and swore, "As I may move about (I swear),	Oure Hooste lough and swoor, "So moot I gon,
And especially the gentlefolk every one.	And namely the gentils everichon.
And worthy to draw into memory,	And worthy for to drawen to memorie,
Who did not say it was a noble story	That he ne seyde it was a noble storie
In all the company there was no one young nor old	In al the route nas ther yong ne oold
Here follow the words between the Host and the Miller	Heere folwen the wordes betwene the Hoost and the Millere
And cover her bright face with a cloud.	And covere hire brighte face with a clowde.
For when men trust her, then will she fail,	For whan men trusteth hire, thanne wol she faille,
With unexpected stroke the reigns that are proud;	With unwar strook the regnes that been proude;
But that Fortune always will assail	But that Fortune alwey wole assaille
Can in singing cry nor bewail (anything)	Ne kan in syngyng crie ne biwaille
Tragedies no other sort of thing	Tragedies noon oother maner thyng
His royal throne could not help him.	His roial trone myghte hym nat availle.
Hanged was Cresus, the proud king;	Anhanged was Cresus, the proude kyng;
Thus warned him very bluntly and also very plainly	Thus warned hym ful plat and ek ful pleyn
Rain shall thee wash, and sun shall thee dry."	Reyn shal thee wasshe, and sonne shal thee drye."
Thou shalt be hanged, father, certainly;	Thou shalt anhanged be, fader, certeyn;
Those are to say the sun beams.	Tho been the sonne stremes for to seyn.
And Phoebus, with his towel so clean,	And Phebus, with his towaille so clene,
And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,	And Juppiter bitokneth snow and reyn,
"The tree," said she, "is to signify the gallows,	"The tree," quod she, "the galwes is to meene,
And she began right thus to expound his dream:	And she his dreem bigan right thus expounde:
He bad her tell him what it signified,	He bad hire telle hym what it signyfyde,
And to his daughter, who stood him beside,	And to his doghter, that stood hym bisyde,
To dry himself with; and therefore his pride grew,	To dryen hym with; and therfore wax his pryde,
And Phoebus also brought him a fair towel	And Phebus eek a fair towaille hym broughte
Where Jupiter washed him, both back and side,	Ther Juppiter hym wessh, bothe bak and syde,
Upon a tree he was, as it seemed to him,	Upon a tree he was, as that hym thoughte,
That in vengeance he set all his heart.	That in vengeance he al his herte sette.
Of which he was so proud and also so pleased	Of which he was so proud and eek so fayn
And also a dream upon one night he dreamed,	And eek a sweven upon a nyght he mette,
That of his foes he could not be slain;	That of his foos he myghte nat be slayn;
He well believed, because Fortune sent him	He wende wel, for that Fortune hym sente
Beginning a new war again.	For to bigynne a newe werre agayn.
When he had escaped, he can not stop	Whanne he escaped was, he kan nat stente
Until Fortune on the gallows made him gape.	Til Fortune on the galwes made hym gape.
But to be wary (of Fortune) no grace yet he had,	But to be war no grace yet he hadde,
That killed the fire, and allowed him to escape;	That slow the fyr, and made hym to escape;
But such a rain down from the sky poured	But swich a reyn doun fro the welkne shadde
And to be burned men led him to the fire.	And to be brent men to the fyr hym ladde.
Yet was he caught amidst all his pride,	Yet was he caught amyddes al his pryde,
This rich Croesus, once king of Lydia,	This riche Cresus, whilom kyng of Lyde,
Croesus	Cresus
Take note of all these conquerors strong.	Witnesse on alle thise conqueroures stronge.
But keep an eye on her for evermore;	But have hire in awayt for everemoo;
Let no man trust upon her favor long,	No man ne truste upon hire favour longe,
Fortune was first friend, and afterwards foe.	Fortune was first freend, and sitthe foo.
How to these two great conquerors	How that to thise grete conqueroures two
That of this history wrote beginning and end,	That of this storie writen word and ende,
And to Suetonius, and to Valerius also,	And to Swetoun, and to Valerius also,
Of decency yet had he remembrance.	Of honestee yet hadde he remembraunce.
And knew truly that he was dead,	And wiste verraily that deed was hee,
And as he lay a-dying in a trance,	And as he lay of diyng in a traunce,
So that no man should see his private parts;	For no man sholde seen his privetee;
His mantle over his hips cast he,	His mantel over his hypes caste he,
That though his deadly wounds sorely pained,	That though his deedly woundes soore smerte,
And so well loved dignified decency,	And so wel lovede estaatly honestee,
So manly was this Julius of heart,	So manly was this Julius of herte,
Or else at two, unless his history lies.	Or elles at two, but if his storie lye.
With many a wound, and thus they let him lie;	With many a wounde, and thus they lete hym lye;
And stuck him with daggers straightway	And stiked hym with boydekyns anoon
This false Brutus and his other foes,	This false Brutus and his othere foon,
And in the Capitol straightway seized him	And in the Capitolie anon hym hente
Upon one day, as he was accustomed to go,	Upon a day, as he was wont to goon,
This Julius to the Capitol went	This Julius to the Capitolie wente
With daggers, as I shall tell you.	With boydekyns, as I shal yow devyse.
And planned the place in which he should die	And caste the place in which he sholde dye
Against this Julius in a cunning manner,	Agayns this Julius in subtil wise,
Who ever had envy of his high estate,	That evere hadde of his hye estaat envye,
But on a time Brutus Cassius,	But on a tyme Brutus Cassius,
With his triumphal procession, very nobly crowned with laurel;	With his triumphe, lauriat ful hye;
To Rome again repairs Julius	To Rome agayn repaireth Julius
That Fortune unto such an end thee brought!	That Fortune unto swich a fyn thee broghte!
Alas, Pompey, of the east conqueror,	Allas, Pompeye, of th' orient conquerour,
Of Julius, and he brought him the head.	Of Julius, and hym the heed he broghte.
His head off smote, to win himself favor	His heed of smoot, to wynnen hym favour
I say, one of his men, a false traitor,	I seye, oon of his men, a fals traitour,
This Pompey, this noble governor	This Pompeus, this noble governour
But now for a little while I will bewail	But now a litel while I wol biwaille
Thank Fortune, that so well helped thee to succeed!	Thanke Fortune, that so wel thee spedde!
Through which thou puttest all the east in awe.	Thurgh which thou puttest al th' orient in awe.
Save for a few folk that fled with Pompey,	Save fewe folk that with Pompeus fledde,
Thou through thy knighthood hast them taken and slain,	Thou thurgh thy knyghthod hast hem take and slawe,
As far as where the day begins to dawn,	As fer as that the day bigynneth dawe,
Who of the east had all the dominion by conquest	That of the orient hadde al the chivalrie
Against Pompey, thy father in law,	Agayn Pompeus, fader thyn in lawe,
Until Fortune became his adversary.	Til that Fortune weex his adversarie.
And afterwards of Rome the emperor was he	And sitthe of Rome the emperour was he
And unto Rome made them tributary;	And unto Rome made hem tributarie;
By strength of hand, or else by treaty,	By strengthe of hand, or elles by tretee,
That won all the west by land and sea,	That wan al th' occident by land and see,
Up rose this Julius, the conqueror,	Up roos he Julius, the conquerour,
From humble bed to royal majesty	From humble bed to roial magestee
By wisdom, manhood, and by great labor,	By wisedom, manhede, and by greet labour,
Concerning Julius Caesar	De Julio Cesare
False Fortune, and to despise poison,	False Fortune, and poyson to despise,
Alas, who shall me help to indict	Allas, who shal me helpe to endite
So full was his disposition of high knightly prowess.	So ful was his corage of heigh emprise.
And yet it seemed to him it might not suffice?	And yet hym thoughte it myghte nat suffise?
Who all the world wielded in his control,	That al the world weelded in his demeyne,
The death of nobility and of magnanimity,	The deeth of gentillesse and of franchise,
Who shall give me tears to complain	Who shal me yeven teeris to compleyne
And for thee she wept never a tear.	And for thee ne weep she never a teere.
Fortune has turned thy six [highest throw] into an ace [lowest],	Thy sys Fortune hath turned into aas,
That ever should befall such a case!	That evere sholde fallen swich a cas!
O worthy, noble Alexander, alas,	O worthy, gentil Alisandre, allas,
Who first was king in the country of Greece.	That first was kyng in Grece the contree.
He was the son of Philip of Macedonia,	Philippes sone of Macidoyne he was,
Twelve years he reigned, as says Maccabees.	Twelf yeer he regned, as seith Machabee.
About his knighthood, it could not suffice.	Of his knyghthod, it myghte nat suffise.
For though I should write or told you evermore	For though I write or tolde yow everemo
The world was his -- what more should I tell?	The world was his -- what sholde I moore devyse?
I say, as far as man can ride or walk,	I seye, as fer as man may ryde or go,
Of kings, princes, dukes, earls bold	Of kynges, princes, dukes, erles bolde
Of Darius, and a hundred thousand more	Of Darius, and an hundred thousand mo
What honor were it to him, though I you told	What pris were it to hym, though I yow tolde
So was he full of leonine courage.	So was he ful of leonyn corage.
His noble ambition in arms and struggles,	His hye entente in armes and labour,
Save wine and women, no thing might assuage	Save wyn and wommen, no thing myghte aswage
Fortune made him the heir of her honor.	Fortune hym made the heir of hire honour.
He was flower of knighthood and of nobility;	He was of knyghthod and of fredom flour;
For all this world for dread of him has trembled.	For al this world for drede of hym hath quaked.
Comparison might never yet be made	Comparisoun myghte nevere yet been maked
Wherever he came, unto the world's end.	Wherso he cam, unto the worldes ende.
The pride of man and beast he laid low,	The pride of man and beest he leyde adoun,
They were glad to send unto him (to sue) for peace .	They weren glad for pees unto hym sende.
He won by strength, or for his high renown	He wan by strengthe, or for his hye renoun
This wide world, in the end,	This wyde world, as in conclusioun,
Has heard something or all of his fortune.	Hath herd somwhat or al of his fortune.
That every person who has good judgment	That every wight that hath discrecioun
The history of Alexander is so commonly known	The storie of Alisaundre is so commune
Such reward as belongs to pride.	Swich gerdoun as bilongeth unto pryde.
That many a man made to weep and mourn,	That many a man made to wepe and pleyne,
Thus has this robber and this homicide,	Thus hath this robbour and this homycide,
He died very wretchedly on a mountain.	He starf ful wrecchedly in a monteyne.
And in this stink and this horrible pain,	And in this stynk and this horrible peyne,
No man could bear him in any way.	No man ne myghte hym bere to ne fro.
Full loathsome was the stink of his decaying body;	Ful wlatsom was the stynk of his careyne;
To all his host and to himself also	To al his hoost and to hymself also
And acknowledged God lord of every creature.	And knew God lord of every creature.
Could not endure the stink of him.	Ne myghte noght the stynk of hym endure.
Whether he stayed awake or else slept,	Wheither so he wook or ellis slepte,
That no one of all his household that served him,	That noon of al his meynee that hym kepte,
And in addition to all that he stank so horribly	And therwithal he stank so horribly
That through his body wicked worms crept,	That thurgh his body wikked wormes crepte,
The vengeance of God smote him so cruelly	The wreche of God hym smoot so cruelly
All badly bruised, both back and side.	Al forbrused, bothe bak and syde.
But in a sedan chair men carried him about,	But in a chayer men aboute hym bar,
So that he might neither walk nor ride,	So that he neyther myghte go ne ryde,
For he so sorely fell out of his throne	For he so soore fil out of his char
God laid low all his pride and all his boast.	God daunted al his pride and al his boost.
And suddenly, before he was aware of it,	And sodeynly, er he was of it war,
But commanded straightway to prepare his host;	But bad anon apparaillen his hoost;
For all his pain, he would not restrain himself,	For al his smert, he wolde hym nat restreyne,
But from his cursed and damnable purpose,	But from his purpos cursed and dampnable,
For many a man's gut did he pain.	For many a mannes guttes dide he peyne.
And certainly the punishment was reasonable,	And certeinly the wreche was resonable,
That his pains were intolerable.	That his peynes weren importable.
With invisible wound, ever incurable,	With invisible wounde, ay incurable,
God because of his threatening so sorely smote him	God for his manace hym so soore smoot
But of his purpose he was prevented very soon.	But of his purpos he was let ful soone.
To wreak his ire on it very cruelly;	To wreken his ire on it ful cruelly;
Unto Jerusalem he would (go) immediately	Unto Jerusalem he wolde eftsoone
And swore, and said very angrily	And swoor, and seyde ful despitously
That he ordered his chariot prepared very hastily,	That he bad greithen his chaar ful hastily,
Unto the Jews such a hate had he	Unto the Jewes swich an hate hadde he
By Jews were vanquished completely,	Of Jewes weren venquysshed myghtily,
Supposing that God could not reduce his pride.	Wenynge that God ne myghte his pride abate.
Them he would slay in torment and in pain,	Hem wolde he sleen in torment and in payne,
And God's people had he most in hate;	And Goddes peple hadde he moost in hate;
And all the floods of the sea restrain.	And alle the floodes of the see restrayne.
And in a scales weigh each mountain,	And in balance weyen ech montayne,
Unto the stars upon every side,	Unto the sterres upon every syde,
That truly he supposed he might attain	That verraily he wende he myghte attayne
Fortune had elevated him so in pride	Fortune hym hadde enhaunced so in pride
And on a hill how wretchedly he died.	And in an hill how wrecchedly he deyde.
And read the proud words that he said,	And rede the proude wordes that he seyde,
Read who he was in Maccabees,	Rede which that he was in Machabee,
For such another was there no one like him.	For swich another was ther noon as he.
His high pride, his venomous deeds?	His hye pride, his werkes venymus?
To tell his high royal majesty,	To telle his hye roial magestee,
What needs it of king Antiochus	What nedeth it of kyng Anthiochus
[Concerning the Famous King Antiochus]	De Rege Antiocho illustri
And with his head unto her town she went.	And with his heed unto hir toun she wente.
Very secretly she stole (away) from every person,	Ful pryvely she stal from every wight,
Judith, a woman, as he lay on his back	Judith, a womman, as he lay upright
And yet, for all his pomp and all his might,	And yet, for al his pompe and al his myght,
Within his tent, large as is a barn,	Withinne his tente, large as is a berne,
Amid his host he lay drunk at night,	Amydde his hoost he dronke lay a-nyght,
But take heed of the death of Holofernes:	But taak kep of the deth of Oloferne:
Where Eliachim (Joachim) was a priest of that place.	Where Eliachim a preest was of that place.
Save in Bethulia, a strong city,	Save in Bethulia, a strong citee,
Against his command no person dared trespass,	Agayns his heeste no wight dorst trespace,
"No other god should be adored."	"Noon oother god sholde adoured bee."
But he made every man renounce his religion.	But he made every man reneyen his lawe.
For (fear of) loss of riches or liberty,	For lesynge of richesse or libertee,
Not only that this world had him in awe	Nat oonly that this world hadde hym in awe
Until his head was off, before he knew it.	Til that his heed was of, er that he wiste.
So wantonly, and led him up and down	So likerously, and ladde hym up and doun
Than Holofernes, whom Fortune always kissed	Than Oloferne, which Fortune ay kiste
Nor more arrogant in high presumption	Ne moore pompous in heigh presumpcioun
In his time, nor greater of renown,	As in his tyme, ne gretter of renoun,
Nor was stronger in all things concerning the field of battle,	Ne strenger was in feeld of alle thyng,
Was never captain under a king	Was nevere capitayn under a kyng
Concerning Holofernes	De Oloferno
About which Fortune laughed, and amused herself.	Of which Fortune lough, and hadde a game.
Himself he slew, he knew no better course of action,	Hymself he slow, he koude no bettre reed,
No insult was done for his ill fame.	Were no despit ydoon for his defame.
So that to his body, when he was deed,	That to his body, whan that he were deed,
To slay him and to strike off his head,	To sleen hym and to girden of his heed,
And to these two churls he did pray	And to thise cherles two he gan to preye
That sat by a fire, great and red.	That seten by a fyr, greet and reed.
And he ran into a garden to hide himself.	And ran into a gardyn hym to hyde.
For dread of this it seemed to him that he died,	For drede of this hym thoughte that he deyde,
For help, but it could not happen.	For socour, but it myghte nat bityde.
And to his gods pitiably he prayed	And to his goddes pitously he preyde
For fear almost out of his wit he went,	For fere almoost out of his wit he breyde,
"Where is this false tyrant, this Nero?"	"Where is this false tiraunt, this Neroun?"
That with his ears he heard how they said,	That with his erys herde he how they seyde,
The people cried and made a tumult up and down,	The peple cried and rombled up and doun,
And went his way; no longer dared he call.	And wente his wey; no lenger dorste he calle.
The tighter they shut all the doors.	The fastere shette they the dores alle.
He knocked fast, and always the more he cried	He knokked faste, and ay the moore he cried
Alone, and where he supposed to have been allied	Allone, and ther he wende han been allied
Out of his doors right away he has hastened himself	Out of his dores anon he hath hym dight
For his wickedness, and when he espied it,	For his defaute, and whan he it espied,
The people rose upon him on one night	The peple roos upon hym on a nyght
When he least expects it, the most quickly shall he fall."	Whan he leest weneth, sonnest shal he falle."
By God, out of his throne I will snatch him;	By God, out of his sete I wol hym trice;
In high degree, and call him emperor.	In heigh degree, and emperour hym calle.
She thought thus: "By God! I am too foolish	She thoughte thus: "By God! I am to nyce
For though he may be strong, yet was she stronger.	For though that he were strong, yet was she strenger.
The high pride of Nero to cherish,	The hye pryde of Nero to cherice,
Now it happened that Fortune no longer desired	Now fil it so that Fortune liste no lenger
And thus has Nero slain his dear master.	And thus hath Nero slayn his maister deere.
Rather than have another form of torment;	Rather than han another tormentise;
Chose in a bath to die in this manner	Chees in a bath to dye in this manere
But nonetheless this Seneca the wise	But natheless this Seneca the wise
Therefore he made him die in this manner.	Therefore he made hym dyen in this wise.
In youth to rise in the presence of his master ,	In youthe agayns his maister for to ryse,
This Nero had also the custom	This Nero hadde eek of acustumaunce
On both his arms, until he had to die.	On bothe his armes, til he moste dye.
For which he in a bath made him to bleed	For which he in a bath made hym to blede
Be virtuous and hate tyranny --"	Be vertuous and hate tirannye --"
"Sire," would he say, "an emperor must of necessity	"Sire," wolde he seyn, "an emperour moot nede
Discreetly, as by word and not by deed --	Discreetly, as by word and nat by dede --
For he would always chastise him from vices	For he fro vices wolde hym ay chastise
Because Nero had of him such dread,	By cause Nero hadde of hym swich drede,
Or any vice dared unloose itself upon him.	Or any vice dorste on hym uncowple.
That long time it was before tyranny	That longe tyme it was er tirannye
He made him so cunning and so humble	He maked hym so konnyng and so sowple
And while this master had of him mastery,	And whil this maister hadde of hym maistrye,
In his time, unless books lie;	As in his tyme, but if bookes lye;
For of morality he was the flower,	For of moralitee he was the flour,
To teach him literature and courtesy,	To teche hym letterure and curteisye,
In youth this emperor had a master	In yowthe a maister hadde this emperour
Alas, too deep will the venom go!	Allas, to depe wol the venym wade!
And drank straightway -- no other mourning he made.	And drank anon -- noon oother wo he made.
He commanded that the wine be brought to him ,	The wyn to bryngen hym comanded he,
Be judge of her dead beauty.	Be domesman of hire dede beautee.
Great wonder is how that he could or might	Greet wonder is how that he koude or myghte
Came, but he said, "A fair woman was she!"	Ne cam, but seyde, "A fair womman was she!"
No tear out of his eyes for that sight	No teere out of his eyen for that sighte
That he reckoned so little of his mother!	That he so litel of his mooder tolde!
Where he was conceived -- so woe oh woe	Where he conceyved was -- so weilaway
For he slit her womb to behold	For he hire wombe slitte to biholde
And slew his brother, and by his sister lay.	And slow his brother, and by his suster lay.
To hear how men would weep and cry;	To heere how that men wolde wepe and crie;
The senators he slew upon one day	The senatours he slow upon a day
He burned Rome for his pleasure;	He Rome brende for his delicasie;
For Fortune as his friend would obey him.	For Fortune as his freend hym wolde obeye.
His desires were all lawful in his legal code,	His lustes were al lawe in his decree,
To fish in Tiber, when he wished to amuse himself.	To fisshe in Tybre, whan hym liste pleye.
Nets of gold thread had he in great plenty	Nettes of gold threed hadde he greet plentee
After that time he wanted never to see it.	After that tyme he nolde it nevere see.
More proud than he was never emperor;	Moore proud was nevere emperour than he;
More fond of luxury, more pompous in behavior,	Moore delicaat, moore pompous of array,
For he in gems greatly did delight.	For he in gemmes greetly gan delite.
Were all his clothes embroidered from head to toe,	Were alle his clothes brouded up and doun,
Of rubies, sapphires, and of white pearls	Of rubies, saphires, and of peerles white
Both east and west, [south], and north.	Bothe est and west, [south], and septemtrioun.
Had this wide world in subjection,	This wyde world hadde in subjeccioun,
Yet he, as Suetonius tells us,	Yet he, as telleth us Swetonius,
As any fiend that lies very low down (in Hell),	As any feend that lith ful lowe adoun,
Nero	In great detail; not one word will he lack.
Fro point to point; nat o word wol he faille.	Who is called Dante, for he can all narrate
That highte Dant, for he kan al devyse	Read the great poet of Italy
Redeth the grete poete of Ytaille	Whoever wants to hear it in a longer version,
Whoso wol here it in a lenger wise,	Of this tragedy it ought enough suffice;
Of this tragedie it oghte ynough suffise;	From high estate Fortune cut him away.
From heigh estaat Fortune awey hym carf.	Thus ended is this mighty Earl of Pisa.
Thus ended is this myghty Erl of Pize.	Himself, despaired, also for hunger died;
Hymself, despeired, eek for hunger starf;	They laid themselves down in his lap and died.
And after that, withinne a day or two,	And eat enough" -- right thus they to him said,
And ete ynogh" -- right thus they to hym seyde,	Our flesh thou gave us, take our flesh from us,
Oure flessh thou yaf us, take oure flessh us fro,	But rather eat the flesh upon us two.
But rather ete the flessh upon us two.	And said, "Father, do not so, alas!
And seyde, "Fader, do nat so, allas!	That he gnawed on his arms, and not for woe,
That he his armes gnow, and nat for wo,	His children supposed that it was for hunger
His children wende that it for hunger was	I can blame thy false wheel for all my woe."
Thy false wheel my wo al may I wyte."	And said, "Alas, Fortune, and woe oh woe!
And seyde, "Allas, Fortune, and weylaway!	For woe his two arms he began to bite,
And whan the woful fader deed it say,	And kissed his father, and died the same day.
And kiste his fader, and dyde the same day.	And said, "Farewell, father, I must die!"
And seyde, "Farewel, fader, I moot dye!"	Until in his father's bosom down it lay,
Til in his fadres barm adoun it lay,	Thus day by day this child began to cry,
Thus day by day this child bigan to crye,	There is nothing, but food, that I would rather have."
Ther is no thyng, but breed, that me were levere."	Then hunger should not creep in my belly;
Thanne sholde nat hunger in my wombe crepe;	Now would God that I might sleep forever!
Now wolde God that I myghte slepen evere!	I am so hungry that I can not sleep.
I am so hungry that I may nat slepe.	Is there no morsel of bread that you do keep?
Whanne wol the gayler bryngen oure potage?	Unto him said, "Father, why do you weep?
Unto hym seyde, "Fader, why do ye wepe?	His young son, who was three years of age,
His yonge sone, that thre yeer was of age,	Therewith the tears fell from his eyes.
Therwith the teeris fillen from his yen.	"Alas!" said he, "Alas, that I was wrought!"
"Allas!" quod he, "Allas, that I was wroght!"	That they for hunger would make him die.
That they for hunger wolde doon hym dyen.	And in his heart straightway there fell a thought
And in his herte anon ther fil a thoght	He heard it well, but he spoke absolutely nothing,
He herde it wel, but he spak right noght,	The jailer shut the doors of the tower.
The gayler shette the dores of the tour.	When his meal was accustomed to be brought,
And on a day bifil that in that hour	And in addition it was very poor and bad.
And therwithal it was ful povre and badde.	So small that it just barely can suffice,
So smal that wel unnethe it may suffise,	As you have heard, and meat and drink he had
As ye han herd, and mete and drynke he hadde	And put him into prison in such manner
And putten hym to prisoun in swich wise	Through which the people did rise against him
Thurgh which the peple gan upon hym rise	Had on him made a false accusation,
Hadde on hym maad a fals suggestioun,	For Roger, who was bishop of Pisa,
For Roger, which that bisshop was of Pize,	He was damned to die in that prison,
Dampned was he to dyen in that prisoun,	To put such birds in such a cage!
Allas, Fortune, it was greet crueltee	The eldest was scarcely five years of age.
The eldest scarsly fyf yeer was of age.	And with him are his three little children;
And with hym been his litel children thre;	In which tower in prison he was put,
In which tour in prisoun put was he,	But a little way out of Pisa stands a tower,
But litel out of Pize stant a tour,	There can no tongue tell for pity.
Ther may no tonge telle for pitee.	Of the anguish of Earl Ugolino of Pisa
Off the Erl Hugelyn of Pyze the langour	[Concerning Ugolino, Earl of Pisa]
De Hugelino Comite de Pize	But why nor how thou were slain I know not.
But why ne how noot I that thou were slawe.	Within his prison made thee to die --
For he thy nevew was and sone-in-lawe,	Thy brother's son, who was thy double kinsman,
Thy brother sone, that was thy double allye,	Since in rank thou had climbed so high?
Sith in estaat thow cloumbe were so hye?	Why should I not thy misfortune recount,
Why sholde I nat thyn infortune acounte,	God of delight and scourge of Lombardy,
God of delit and scourge of Lumbardye,	Great Bernabo Viscounti of Milan,
Off Melan grete Barnabo Viscounte,	Concerning Bernabo Visconti of Lombardy
De Barnabo de Lumbardia	And out of joy bring men to sorrow.
And out of joye brynge men to sorwe.	Thus can Fortune govern and guide her wheel,
Thus kan Fortune hir wheel governe and gye,	They in thy bed have slain thee in the morning.
And for no thyng but for thy chivalrie	Of which thine own lieges had envy,
Of which thyne owene liges hadde envie,	To very many a heathen thou wroughtest great woe,
Ful many an hethen wroghtestow ful wo,	Who won Alexandria by great strength,
That Alisandre wan by heigh maistrie,	O worthy Pierre, king of Cyprus, also,
O worthy Petro, kyng of Cipre, also,	Concerning Pierre de Lusignan, King of Cyprus
De Petro Rege de Cipro	Brought this worthy king into such a plight.
Broghte this worthy kyng in swich a brike.	Ganelon-Oliver, corrupt for a bribe,
Genylon-Olyver, corrupt for meede,	Of truth and honor, but of Armorica
Of trouthe and honour, but of Armorike	Not Charlemagne's Oliver, who always took heed
The wikked nest was werker of this nede.	He brewed this cursedness and all this sin.
He brew this cursednesse and al this synne.	Caught by the bird-lime on a rod colored like the burning coal,
Caught with the lymrod coloured as the gleede,	The field of snow, with the eagle of black therein,
The feeld of snow, with th' egle of blak therinne,	Succeeding to thy reign and to thy income.
Succedynge in thy regne and in thy rente.	Where he with his own hand slew thee,
Where as he with his owene hand slow thee,	Thou were betrayed and led unto his tent,
Thou were bitraysed and lad unto his tente,	And after, at a siege, by trickery,
And after, at a seege, by subtiltee,	Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,
Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,	Well ought men complain of thy piteous death!
Whom Fortune heeld so hye in magestee,	O noble, O worthy Pedro, glory of Spain,
O noble, O worthy Petro, glorie of Spayne,	Concerning Pedro King of Castille
De Petro Rege Ispannie	Shall bear a spinning staff, to pay for her living costs.
Shal bere a distaf, hire cost for to quyte.	And she that bore the scepter full of flowers
And she that bar the ceptre ful of floures	Shall on her head now wear a woman's headdress;
Shal on hir heed now were a vitremyte;	And won by force strong towns and towers,
And wan by force townes stronge and toures,	And she who wore helmets in violent battles
And she that helmed was in starke stoures	Now all the people stare on her, alas!
Now gaureth al the peple on hire, allas!	Fearsome to kings and to emperors,
Allas, Fortune! She that whilom was	And her clothing loaded full of precious stones.
And ful of perree charged hire clothynge.	Crowned was she, in accord with her rank,
Coroned was she, as after hir degree,	With gilded chains hanging on her neck.
With gilte cheynes on hire nekke hangynge.	Before his triumphal procession she walks,
Biforen his triumphe walketh shee,	Has with him led, so that men should see it.
Hath with hym lad, for that men sholde it see.	This great Roman, this Aurelian,
This grete Romayn, this Aurelian,	Her chariot, that was wrought with gold and precious stones,
Hir chaar, that was with gold wroght and perree,	Amongst other things that he won,
Amonges othere thynges that he wan,	And won the land, and home to Rome he went.
And fettred hire, and eek hire children tweye,	He made her flee, and at the last seized her,
He made hire flee, and atte laste hire hente,	Toward Zenobia, and shortly to say,
Toward Cenobie, and shortly for to seye,	And with his legions he took his way
And with his legions he took his weye	He prepared to do vengeance upon this queen.
He shoop upon this queene to doon vengeaunce.	Of Rome came into his two hands,
Of Rome cam into his handes tweye,	Aurelian, when the governance
Aurelian, whan that the governaunce	To wretchedness and to misfortune.
To wrecchednesse and to mysaventure.	Fortune out of her reign made her fall
Fortune out of hir regne made hire falle	This mighty queen can no longer endure.
But ay Fortune hath in hire hony galle;	Their names were, as Persians call them.
Hir names were, as Persiens hem calle.	And Hermanno and Thymalao
And Hermanno and Thymalao	As heirs of all their father's reigns,
As heires of hir fadres regnes alle,	In kings' clothing went her two sons,
In kynges habit wente hir sones two,	Or with her troop put them to flight.
Or with hir meignee putten hem to flighte.	Lest she would slay them with her hands,
Lest that she wolde hem with hir handes slen,	Within the field that dared fight with her,
Withinne the feeld that dorste with hire fighte,	Nor Syrian, nor any Arabian,
Ne Surrien, ne noon Arabyen,	Nor any Armenian, nor any Egyptian,
Ne dorste nevere been so corageus,	Nor, before him, the Roman Galien,
Ne hym bifore, the Romayn Galien,	The Emperor of Rome, Claudius
The Emperour of Rome, Claudius	To be in peace, and let her ride about and enjoy herself.
To been in pees, and lete hire ride and pleye.	With her they made alliance by covenant
With hire they maden alliance by bond	That she would not make war upon his land.
That she ne wolde upon his lond werreye.	That he was not glad, if he found such grace,
That he nas glad, if he that grace fond,	That there was no king nor prince in all that land
That ther nas kyng ne prynce in al that lond	Against her foes she fought so cruelly
Agayn hir foos she faught so cruelly	Defended the country, and with her own hand
Whan Odenake was deed, she myghtily	Who wrote at length about this, I guarantee.
That writ ynough of this, I undertake.	Let him unto my master Petrarch go,
Lat hym unto my maister Petrak go,	How she was besieged and taken --
How that she was biseged and ytake --	And after, of her troubles and her woe,
And after, of hir meschief and hire wo,	Why she conquered and what legal claim she had to it,
Why she conquered and what title had therto,	And how all this business happened in actuality,
And how that al this proces fil in dede,	Against Shapur the king and many others,
Agayn Sapor the kyng and othere mo,	Their battles, whoever may wish to read them,
Hir batailles, whoso list hem for to rede,	Always while Odenake's days lasted.
Ne nevere myghte hir foomen doon hem flee,	Of Rome, and with strong hand held them very tightly,
Of Rome, and with strong hond held hem ful faste,	Belonging unto the majesty
Apertenaunt unto the magestee	In the orient, with many a fair city
In the orient, with many a fair citee	That they conquered many great realms
That they conquered manye regnes grete	So doughty was her husband and also she,
So doghty was hir housbonde and eek she,	And shortly of this history to treat,
And shortly of this storie for to trete,	How she in virtue might spend her life.
How she in vertu myghte hir lyf dispende.	To learn books was all her desire,
To lerne bookes was al hire likyng,	When she had leisure; and to endeavor
To have of sondry tonges ful knowyng,	And also she did not neglect, for any hunting,
And eek she lafte noght, for noon huntyng,	She was all clad in precious stones and in gold,
She was al clad in perree and in gold,	As well in utensils as in her clothing.
As wel in vessel as in hire clothyng.	Her rich furnishings could not be told,
Hir riche array ne myghte nat be told,	Was none, though through all this world men should seek.
Was noon, though al this world men sholde seke.	Nor more labor could in war endure,
Ne moore labour myghte in werre endure,	So assiduous in the war, and courtly also,
So penyble in the werre, and curteis eke,	And wise also, and generous in moderation,
And wys therwith, and large with mesure,	I say, so worshipful a creature,
But now unto oure tale turne we.	Whom she kept in virtue and learning.
The whiche she kepte in vertu and lettrure.	Two sons by this Odenake had she,
Two sones by this Odenake hadde she,	In any other case, if men had sexual relations with them.
In oother caas, if that men with hem pleyde.	It was to wives lechery and shame,
It was to wyves lecherie and shame,	He got no more of her, for thus she said:
He gat namoore of hire, for thus she seyde:	Even if this Odenake were wild or tame,
Al were this Odenake wilde or tame,	Then would she once allow him to do the same.
Thanne wolde she ones suffre hym do the same.	Until fully forty weeks were past;
Til fully fourty wikes weren past;	No more should he play that same game
And if she were with childe at thilke cast,	Again, and only but once, no doubt.
Eft-soone, and nat but oones, out of drede.	Then would she allow him to do his desires
Thanne wolde she suffre hym doon his fantasye	That she was not with child by means of that deed,
That she was nat with childe with that dede,	And as soon as she could see
And also soone as that she myghte espye	To have a child, the world to multiply;
To have a child, the world to multiplye;	But once, for it was her full intention
But ones, for it was hir pleyn entente	In any way, that he should by her lie
By no wey, that he sholde by hire lye	Save one thing: that she would never assent,
Save o thyng: that she wolde nevere assente,	For each of them held the other beloved and dear,
They lyved in joye and in felicitee,	But nonetheless, when they were knit together,
But natheless, whan they were knyt in-feere,	Had such fantasies as had she.
Hadde swiche fantasies as hadde she.	And you must understand that he
And ye shul understonde how that he	Although it was so that she long delayed them.
Al were it so that she hem longe taried.	To Odenake, a prince of that country,
To Odenake, a prynce of that contree,	But at the last her friends have married her
But atte laste hir freendes han hire maried	She disdained to be bound to no man.
To no man deigned hire for to be bonde.	She kept her maidenhead from every person;
She kepte hir maydenhod from every wight;	There might no thing withstand her arms.
With any yong man, were he never so wight.	Wrestle, by sheer force and sheer strength,
Wrastlen, by verray force and verray myght,	And to sleep under a bush, and she could also
And slepen under a bussh, and she koude eke	And to run in the mountains all the night,
And rennen in the montaignes al the nyght,	She dared to seek wild beasts' dens,
She dorste wilde beestes dennes seke,	And in her arms handled them at her will.
And in hir armes weelde hem at hir wille.	Lions, leopards, and bears all torn to pieces,
Leouns, leopardes, and beres al torente,	And when she was older, she would kill
And whan that she was elder, she wolde kille	She was so swift that she quickly seized them;
She was so swift that she anon hem hente;	With broad-headed arrows that she to them sent.
And many a wilde hertes blood she shedde	Duties of women, and to the woods she went,
Office of wommen, and to wode she wente,	From her childhood I find that she fled
From hire childhede I fynde that she fledde	But of her shape she could not be improved.
But of hir shap she myghte nat been amended.	I say not that she had most beauty,
I seye nat that she hadde moost fairnesse,	Of the blood of kings of Persia is she descended.
Of kynges blood of Perce is she descended.	Nor in lineage, nor in other noble traits.
Ne in lynage, ne in oother gentillesse.	That no person passed her in boldness,
That no wight passed hire in hardynesse,	So worthy was in arms and so fierce
So worthy was in armes and so keene	As Persians write of her nobility,
Cenobia, of Palymerie queene,	Zenobia
Cenobia	This proverb is very true and very common.
This proverbe is ful sooth and ful commune.	Misfortune will make them enemies, I believe;
Mishap wol maken hem enemys, I gesse;	For whatever man who has friends because of Fortune,
For what man that hath freendes thurgh Fortune,	And also his friends, both high ranking and low.
And eek his freendes, bothe moore and lesse.	She bears away his reign and his riches,
She bereth awey his regne and his richesse,	For when Fortune will forsake a man,
For whan Fortune wole a man forsake,	How in lordship is no security,
How that in lordshipe is no sikernesse,	Gentlemen, example may you take from this
Thogh he therto hadde neither right ne lawe.	And Darius occupies his throne,
And Darius occupieth his degree,	And that same night this king was slain,
And thilke same nyght this kyng was slawe,	Given to Medes and to Persians," said he.
To Medes and to Perses yeven," quod he.	Broken up is thy kingdom, and it shall be
Dyvyded is thy regne, and it shal be	Thy reign is done; thou art of no account at all.
Thy regne is doon; thou weyest noght at al.	Wrote Mane, techel, pares, trust me;
Wroot Mane, techel, phares, truste me;	"This hand was sent from God that on the wall
"This hand was sent from God that on the wal	Therefore to thee is ordained very great pain.
Therefore to thee yshapen ful greet pyne ys.	And worship false gods cursedly;
Dronke of the same vessels sondry wynys;	Thy wife also, and thy wenches, sinfully
Thy wyf eek, and thy wenches, synfully	Thou drank also of his vessels boldly;
Thou drank eek of his vessels boldely;	And art rebel to God, and art his foe.
And art rebel to God, and art his foo.	And knowest all these things truly,
And knowest alle thise thynges verraily,	"Also thou, who art his son, art proud also,
"Eek thou, that art his sone, art proud also,	And to him restored his reign and his bodily form.
And hym restored his regne and his figure.	And then had God on him compassion,
And thanne hadde God of hym compassioun,	Over every reign and every creature;
Over every regne and every creature;	That God of heaven has domination
Til that he knew, by grace and by resoun,	And ate hay as a beast in wet (weather) and dry
And eet hey as a beest in weet and drye	With asses was his habitation,
With asses was his habitacioun,	"He was cast out of man's company;
"He was out cast of mannes compaignye;	And took away from him the reign that he had.
And hym birafte the regne that he hadde.	And therefore God sent great vengeance upon him,
And therfore God greet wreche upon hym sente,	And he was proud and not at all dreaded God,
And he was proud and nothyng God ne dradde,	Glory and honor, reign, treasure, income;
Glorie and honour, regne, tresour, rente;	And said, "King, God to thy father lent
And seyde, "Kyng, God to thy fader lente	But Daniel explained it right away,
That koude expoune what this lettre mente;	In all that land was no magician
In all that land magicien was noon	Wrote Mane, techel, phares, and no more.
Wroot Mane, techel, phares, and namoore.	This hand that so deeply terrified Belshazzar
This hand that Balthasar so soore agaste	For fear of which he quaked and sighed deeply.
For feere of which he quook and siked soore.	And saw a hand, armless, that wrote very fast,
And saugh an hand, armlees, that wroot ful faste,	And on a wall this king cast his eyes
And on a wal this kyng his eyen caste	Various wines out of these noble vessels.
Out of thise noble vessels sondry wynes.	Always drank, while their appetites lasted
Ay dronken, whil hire appetites laste,	His wife, his lords, and his concubines
Of honour that oure eldres with us lafte."	And to our high gods we give thanks
And to oure hye goddes thanke we	Robbed out of the temple of Jerusalem;
Out of the temple of Jerusalem birafte;	"Which my father in his flourishing time
"Whiche that my fader in his prosperitee	"Go, bring forth the vessels," said he,
"Gooth, bryngeth forth the vesseles," quod he,	And then his officers he did call:
And thanne his officeres gan he calle:	Upon a time and bade them be happy;
Upon a tyme and bad hem blithe bee;	A feast he made for all his lords
A feeste he made unto his lordes alle	And suddenly his reign began to break apart.
And sodeynly his regne gan divide.	But Fortune cast him down, and there he lay,
His hye estaat assured hym in pryde;	And also he was always an idolater.
And eek an ydolastre was he ay.	For he was proud of heart and of behavior,
For proud he was of herte and of array,	He by (the example of) his father could not be warned,
He by his fader koude noght be war,	Who held the reign after his father's day,
That heeld the regne after his fader day,	His son, who was called Belshazzar,
His sone, which that highte Balthasar,	Belshazzar
Balthasar	He knew that God was full of might and grace.
He knew that God was ful of myght and grace.	And until that time he was laid on his bier
And til that tyme he leyd was on his beere	Was he to do amiss or again trespass;
He thanked God, and evere his lyf in feere	And gave him back his wits, and then with many a tear
And yaf hym wit, and thanne with many a teere	Until God released him (after) a certain (number of) years,
Til God relessed hym a certeyn yeres,	His nails were like a bird's claws;
His nayles lyk a briddes clawes weere;	And his hair grew to be like an eagle's feathers;
And lik an egles fetheres wax his heres;	Until a certain number of years had passed.
Til certein tyme was ycome aboute.	In rain; with wild beasts walked he
In reyn; with wilde beestes walked hee	And ate hay like an ox, and lay outside
And eet hey as an oxe, and lay theroute	And like a beast he seemed to be,
And lyk a beest hym semed for to bee,	But suddenly he lost his high office,
Ne myghte hym nat bireve of his estaat.	He supposed that God, who sits in majesty,
He wende that God, that sit in magestee,	This king of kings was proud and arrogant;
This kyng of kynges proud was and elaat;	Daniel nor his two young fellows.
Daniel ne his yonge felawes tweye.	But never would assent to (do) that deed
But nevere wolde assente to that dede	He who would not obey shall be burned.
He shal be brent that wolde noght obeye.	Or in a furnace, full of red flames,
Or in a fourneys, ful of flambes rede,	Commanded he to bow down, and hold in veneration,
Comanded he to loute, and have in drede,	To which image both young and old
To which ymage bothe yong and oold	Sixty cubits long and seven in breadth,
This proude kyng leet maken a statue of gold,	Who knew what his dreams meant.
That wiste to what fyn his dremes sowned.	Whereas in Chaldea there was no clerk
Whereas in Chaldeye clerk ne was ther noon	For he expounded the dreams of the king,
For he the dremes of the kyng expowned,	Who was the wisest child of them all,
That was the wiseste child of everychon,	Among others Daniel was one,
Amonges othere Daniel was oon,	And made each of them to be his slave.
And maked ech of hem to been his thral.	Of Israel he had gelded indeed,
Of Israel he leet do gelde anoon,	The fairest children of the blood royal
The faireste children of the blood roial	In which he had his glory and his delight.
At Babiloigne was his sovereyn see,	The vessels of the temple he took with him.
The vessel of the temple he with hym ladde.	He twice won the city of Jerusalem;
He twyes wan Jerusalem the citee;	With tongue can hardly be described.
With tonge unnethe may discryved bee.	That had the king Nebuchadnessar
That hadde the kyng Nabugodonosor	The glorious scepter, and royal majesty
The glorious ceptre, and roial magestee	The mighty throne, the precious treasure,
The myghty trone, the precious tresor,	Nebuchadnessar
Nabugodonosor	By such a means as he would least suppose.
By swich a wey as he wolde leest suppose.	Then she waits to overthrow her man
Beth war, for whan that Fortune list to glose,	Very wise is he who can know himself!
Ful wys is he that kan hymselven knowe!	Before he is aware is often laid very low.
Er he be war is ofte yleyd ful lowe.	For he who follows (the ways of) all this dangerous world
For hym that folweth al this world of prees	Lo, who can trust on Fortune for any time?
Lo, who may truste on Fortune any throwe?	Thus died this worthy, mighty Hercules.
Thus starf this worthy, myghty Hercules.	For with no venom did he deign to die.
For with no venym deigned hym to dye.	He has himself covered over in hot coals,
In hoote coles he hath hymselven raked,	And when he saw no other remedy,
And whan he saugh noon oother remedye,	Until his flesh was blackened because of the venom.
But on his bak this sherte he wered al naked	However it may be, I will not accuse her;
Be as be may, I wol hire noght accusen;	By one who was called Nessus, who made it.
By oon that highte Nessus, that it maked.	But nonetheless some clerks excuse her
But nathelees somme clerkes hire excusen	It made all his flesh fall from his bones.
It made his flessh al from his bones falle.	That before he had worn it half a day
That er that he had wered it half a day	Was so skillfully envenomed indeed
Envenymed was so subtilly withalle	Alas, this shirt -- alas and woe oh woe! --
Allas, this sherte -- allas and weylaway! --	She has sent him a shirt, fresh and gay.
She hath hym sent a sherte, fressh and gay.	And as these clerks make mention,
That highte Dianira, fressh as May;	This noble champion had a sweetheart,
A lemman hadde this noble champioun,	In stead of boundary markers he set a pillar.
In stide of boundes he a pileer sette.	At both ends of the world, says Trophee,
At bothe the worldes endes, seith Trophee,	He was so strong that no man could prevent him.
He was so stroong that no man myghte hym lette.	And he went to see every realm.
And every reawme wente he for to see.	What for his strength and for his great goodness,
What for his strengthe and for his heigh bountee,	Throughout this wide world his name ran,
Thurghout this wyde world his name ran,	That slew as many monsters as did he.
That slow so manye monstres as dide he.	Was never a person, since this world began,
And bar the hevene on his nekke longe.	He slew the grisly boar, and that very quickly;
He slow the grisly boor, and that anon;	He slew the giant Antheus the strong;
He slow the geant Antheus the stronge;	And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone;
And he slow Cacus in a cave of stoon;	He broke one of Achelous' two horns;
Of Acheloys two hornes he brak oon;	He slew the fiery venomous serpent;
He slow the firy serpent venymus;	And made his horses eat him, flesh and bone;
And made his hors to frete hym, flessh and boon;	He slew the cruel tyrant Busirus
He slow the crueel tyrant Busirus	He dragged Cerberus, the hound, out of Hell;
He drow out Cerberus, the hound of helle;	He seized the golden apples of the dragon;
He Arpies slow, the crueel bryddes felle;	He laid down the boast of the Centaurs;
He of Centauros leyde the boost adoun;	He slew and tore off the skin of the lion;
He slow and rafte the skyn of the leoun;	For in his time he was the flower of strength.
For in his tyme of strengthe he was the flour.	His works sing his praise and high renown;
Syngen his werkes laude and heigh renoun;	Of Hercules, the supreme conqueror,
Of Hercules, the sovereyn conquerour,	Hercules
If it concerns their limbs or their lives.	If that it touche hir lymes or hir lyves.
Of such things as they would earnestly keep secret,	Of swich thyng as they wolde han secree fayn,
That no men tell their secrets to their wives	That no men telle hir conseil til hir wyves
Of Sampson now I will say no more.	Of Sampson now wol I namoore sayn.
By the falling of the great temple of stone.	With fallynge of the grete temple of stoon.
And also three thousand bodies, were there slain	And eek thre thousand bodyes, were ther slayn
This is to say, every one of the princes,	This is to seyn, the prynces everichoon,
And slew himself, and also all his foemen.	And slow hymself, and eek his foomen alle.
And down fell temple and all, and there it lay --	And doun fil temple and al, and ther it lay --
For he shook two pillars and made them fall,	For he two pilers shook and made hem falle,
But at the last he made a terrifying assault,	But atte laste he made a foul affray,
And this was in a temple of great magnificence.	And this was in a temple of greet array.
His foemen made a feast upon one day,	His foomen made a feeste upon a day,
The end of this captive was as I shall say.	The ende of this caytyf was as I shal seye.
Since thou from prosperity art fallen into wretchedness.	Sith thou fro wele art falle in wrecchednesse.
Now mayst thou weep with thy blind eyes,	Now maystow wepen with thyne eyen blynde,
O formerly judge, in glory and in riches!	O whilom juge, in glorie and in richesse!
O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind,	O noble Sampsoun, strongest of mankynde,
Where they made him grind at the mill.	Where-as they made hym at the queerne grynde.
But now is he in prison in a cave,	But now is he in prison in a cave,
There was no bond with which men could bind him;	Ther was no boond with which men myghte him bynde;
They bound him securely and put out his eyes.	They bounde hym faste and putten out his yen.
And when they found him in this condition,	And whan that they hym foond in this array,
And made his foemen know all his craft;	And made his foomen al his craft espyen;
She contrived to clip or shear his hair away,	She made to clippe or shere his heres away,
And sleeping on her bosom upon one day,	And slepynge in hir barm upon a day,
And falsely to his foemen she sold him.	And falsly to his foomen she hym solde.
That all his strength lay in his hair,	That in his heeris al his strengthe lay,
Unto his sweetheart Dalilah he told	Unto his lemman Dalida he tolde
For women shall bring him to misfortune!	For wommen shal hym bryngen to meschaunce!
He had the governance of Israel.	He hadde of Israel the governaunce.
And fully twenty winters, year by year,	And fully twenty wynter, yeer by yeere,
For all his powers were in his hair.	For alle his strengthes in his heeres weere.
By command of the divine messenger,	By precept of the messager divyn,
Nor on his head came any razor or scissors,	Ne on his heed cam rasour noon ne sheere,
This Sampson never drank alcoholic drinks nor wine,	This Sampson nevere ciser drank ne wyn,
In all this world there had not been thy peer!	In al this world ne hadde been thy peere!
Had thou not told to women thy secret,	Had thou nat toold to wommen thy secree,
O noble, almighty Sampson, beloved and dear,	O noble, almyghty Sampsoun, lief and deere,
And on his back he has carried them	And on his bak ycaryed hem hath hee
The gates of the town he has plucked up,	The gates of the toun he hath up plyght,
Despite the Philistines of that city,	Maugree Philistiens of that citee,
By sheer force at Gaza on one night,	By verray force at Gazan on a nyght,
Thus God helped him, as The Book of Judges can tell.	Thus heelp hym God, as Judicum can telle.
Of which he drank enough, shortly to say;	Of which he drank ynogh, shortly to seye;
Out of a molar sprang right away a well,	Out of a wang-tooth sprang anon a welle,
And of this ass's jawbone, that was dry,	And of this asses cheke, that was dreye,
And send him drink, or else he must die;	And sende hym drynke, or elles moste he deye;
Was well nigh lost, for which he prayed	Was wel ny lorn, for which he gan to preye
When they were slain, he was so thirsty that he	Whan they were slayn, so thursted hym that he
And had no weapon but an ass's jawbone.	And hadde no wepen but an asses cheke.
A thousand men he slew also with his hand,	A thousand men he slow eek with his hond,
And all their olive trees, and vines also.	And alle hire olyveres, and vynes eke.
And they burned all the grain crops in that land,	And they brende alle the cornes in that lond,
For he on every tail had tied a torch;	For he on every tayl had knyt a brond;
And set the foxes' tails all on fire,	And sette the foxes tayles alle on fire,
And all their tails he tied together,	And alle hir tayles he togydre bond,
And abandoned him, and took another new lover.	And hym forsook, and took another newe.
Unto his foes his secrets did betray,	Unto his foos his conseil gan biwreye,
Until she knew his secrets; and she, untrue,	Til she his conseil knew; and she, untrewe,
His false wife could him so please and earnestly plead	His false wyf koude hym so plese and preye
(While he was) walking toward his wedding by the way.	Toward his weddyng walkynge by the weye.
He slew and tore all to pieces the lion,	He slow and al torente the leoun,
Without any weapon save his two hands,	Withouten wepen save his handes tweye,
Sampson, this noble almighty champion,	Sampsoun, this noble almyghty champioun,
Through which he slew himself for wretchedness.	Thurgh which he slow hymself for wrecchednesse.
To speak of strength, and bravery as well;	To speke of strengthe, and therwith hardynesse;
There was never such another as was he,	Was nevere swich another as was hee,
And stood in noble estate while he could see.	And stood in noblesse whil he myghte see.
And was to God Almighty consecrated,	And was to God Almyghty consecrat,
By the angel long before his nativity,	By th'angel longe er his nativitee,
Lo Sampson, whose birth was announced	Loo Sampsoun, which that was annunciat
To labor, and to hell, and to ruin.	To labour, and to helle, and to meschaunce.
Was driven out of his high prosperity	Was dryven out of hys hye prosperitee
As Adam, until he for misconduct	As Adam, til he for mysgovernaunce
And ruled all paradise save for one tree.	And welte al paradys savynge o tree.
And not begotten of man's unclean sperm,	And nat bigeten of mannes sperme unclene,
With God's own finger was he wrought,	With Goddes owene fynger wroght was he,
Lo Adam, in the field of Damascus	Loo Adam, in the feeld of Damyssene
Out of misery, in which thou art fallen.	Out of miserie, in which that thou art falle.
Now art thou Sathanas, that mayst not depart	Now artow Sathanas, that mayst nat twynne
O Lucifer, brightest of all angels,	O Lucifer, brightest of angels alle,
Down into hell, in which he is yet.	Doun into helle, where he yet is inne.
From high degree yet for his sin he fell	From heigh degree yet fel he for his synne
And not a man, at him will I begin.	And nat a man, at hym wol I bigynne.
At Lucifer, though he was an angel	At Lucifer, though he an angel were
Take warning from these examples true and old.	Be war by thise ensamples trewe and olde.
Let no man trust on blind prosperity;	Lat no man truste on blynd prosperitee;
No man can withstand her onward movement.	Ther may no man the cours of hire withholde.
For certainly, when Fortune desires to flee,	For certein, whan that Fortune list to flee,
To bring them out of their adversity.	To brynge hem out of hir adversitee.
And fell so that there was no remedy	And fillen so that ther nas no remedie
The harm of those who stood in high degree,	The harm of hem that stoode in heigh degree,
Here begins the Monk's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Monkes Tale.
Hold me excused for my ignorance."	Have me excused of myn ignoraunce."
As it now comes unto my memory,	As it now comth unto my remembraunce,
But tell some of them before and some behind,	But tellen hem som bifore and som bihynde,
According to their times, as men find written,	After hir ages, as men writen fynde,
Be it of popes, emperors, or kings,	Be it of popes, emperours, or kynges,
Though I do not tell these things in chronological order,	Though I by ordre telle nat thise thynges,
But first I beseech you in this matter,	But first I yow biseeke in this mateere,
"Now hearken, if it pleases you to hear.	"Now herkneth, if yow liketh for to heere.
And also in meters of many and various sorts.	And eek in meetre in many a sondry wyse.
Many are also composed in prose,	In prose eek been endited many oon,
Of six feet, which men call hexameters.	Of six feet, which men clepen exametron.
And ordinarily they are in verses	And they ben versified communely
Into misery, and ends wretchedly.	Into myserie, and endeth wrecchedly.
And is fallen out of high degree	And is yfallen out of heigh degree
Of one who stood in great prosperity,	Of hym that stood in greet prosperitee,
As old books make us remember,	As olde bookes maken us memorie,
Tragedy means a true narrative,	Tragedie is to seyn a certeyn storie,
Or else, first, I will tell tragedies,	Or ellis, first, tragedies wol I telle,
I will tell you the life of Saint Edward;	I wol yow seyn the lyf of Seint Edward;
And if you desire to listen to me,	And if yow list to herkne hyderward,
To tell you a tale, or two, or three.	To telle yow a tale, or two, or three.
So far as it is conducive to propriety,	As fer as sowneth into honestee,
And said, "I will devote all my efforts,	And seyde, "I wol doon al my diligence,
This worthy Monk took all in patience,	This worthy Monk took al in pacience,
Very often I have heard a truth said in jest!"	Ful ofte in game a sooth I have herd seye!"
But be not angry, my lord, though I am joking.	But be nat wrooth, my lord, though that I pleye.
Venus' payments than we can;	Of Venus paiementz than mowe we;
Folk in holy orders, for you can better pay	Religious folk, for ye mowe bettre paye
This makes it that our wives want to try out	This maketh that oure wyves wole assaye
And feeble that they can not well beget children.	And feble that they may nat wel engendre.
This makes our heirs to be so scrawny	This maketh that oure heires been so sklendre
Of feeble trees there come weak offshoots.	Of fieble trees ther comen wrecched ympes.
At copulating, and we laymen are shrimps.	Of tredyng, and we borel men been shrympes.
Religion has taken up all the best	Religioun hath take up al the corn
Should have a wife; for all the world is lost!	Sholde have a wyf; for al the world is lorn!
Not only thou, but every mighty man,	Nat oonly thou, but every myghty man,
God give me sorrow, unless, if I were a pope,	God yeve me sorwe, but, and I were a pope,
Alas, why wearest thou so wide a cope?	Allas, why werestow so wyd a cope?
Thou would have begotten very many a creature.	Thou haddest bigeten ful many a creature.
To perform all thy desire in procreation,	To parfourne al thy lust in engendrure,
If thou haddest as much permission as thou hast power	Haddestow as greet a leeve as thou hast myght
Thou wouldest have been a chicken-copulator indeed,	Thou woldest han been a tredefowel aright.
Who first brought thee unto the monastic life!	That first thee broghte unto religioun!
I pray to God, give him ruination	I pray to God, yeve hym confusioun
And, in addition to that, of muscles and of bones	And therwithal of brawnes and of bones
But a governor, wily and wise,	But a governour, wily and wys,
No poor cloistered monk, nor no novice,	No povre cloysterer, ne no novys,
Thou art a master when thou art at home;	Thou art a maister whan thou art at hoom;
For by my father's soul, according to my judgment,	For by my fader soule, as to my doom,
Some worthy sexton, or some provisioner,	Som worthy sexteyn, or som celerer,
Upon my faith, thou art some officer,	Upon my feith, thou art som officer,
Thou art not like a penitent or a ghost:	Thou art nat lyk a penant or a goost:
It is a noble pasture where thou goest to eat.	It is a gentil pasture ther thow goost.
Of what monastic order are you, by your father's kin?	Of what hous be ye, by youre fader kyn?
Or Don Thomas, or else Don Albon?	Or daun Thomas, or elles daun Albon?
Which shall I call you -- my lord Don John,	Wher shal I calle yow my lord daun John,
But, by my pledged word, I know not your name.	But, by my trouthe, I knowe nat youre name.
Ride forth, my own lord, do not interrupt our game.	Ryde forth, myn owene lord, brek nat oure game.
Lo, Rochester stands here near by!	Loo, Rouchestre stant heer faste by!
For you must tell a tale truly.	For ye shul telle a tale trewely.
"My lord, the Monk," said he, "cheer up,	"My lord, the Monk," quod he, "be myrie of cheere,
But let us pass away from this matter.	But lat us passe awey fro this mateere.
For she is strong in fighting, by my faith:	For she is byg in armes, by my feith:
Albeit that I dare not stand up to her,	Al be it that I dar nat hire withstonde,
For I am perilous with knife in hand,	For I am perilous with knyf in honde,
Some neighbor, and then be on the run;	Som neighebor, and thanne go my way;
I know well some day she will make me slay	I woot wel she wol do me slee som day
Be like a wild lion, fool-hardy.	Be lik a wilde leoun, fool-hardy.
Or else I am as good as lost, unless I	Or elles I am but lost, but if that I
And out at door immediately I must hasten myself,	And out at dore anon I moot me dighte,
"This is my life, unless I will fight;	"This is my lif, but if that I wol fighte;
That will be browbeaten by every body!	That wol been overlad with every wight!
To wed a milksop, or a coward ape,	To wedden a milksop, or a coward ape,
`Alas,' she says, `that ever I was created	`Allas,' she seith, `that evere I was shape
From daybreak to nightfall right thus she will begin.	Fro day to nyght right thus she wol bigynne.
And thou shalt have my spinning staff and go spin!'	And thou shalt have my distaf and go spynne!'
By God's bones, I will have thy knife,	By corpus bones, I wol have thy knyf,
And cries, `False coward, avenge thy wife!	And crieth, `False coward, wrek thy wyf!
When she comes home she shakes her fists in my face,	Whan she comth hoom she rampeth in my face,
Or be so bold as to offend her,	Or be so hardy to hire to trespace,
"And if any neighbor of mine	"And if that any neighebor of myne
And break them, both back and every bone!'	And brek hem, bothe bak and every boon!'
And cries, `Slay the dogs every one	And crieth, `Slee the dogges everichoon,
She brings me forth the great knobby clubs,	She bryngeth me forth the grete clobbed staves,
By God's bones, when I beat my knaves,	By Goddes bones, whan I bete my knaves,
As was this Melibeus' wife Prudence.	As was this Melibeus wyf Prudence.
For she is in no way of such patience	For she nys no thyng of swich pacience
That Goodelief, my wife, had heard this tale!	That Goodelief, my wyf, hadde herd this tale!
(I swear that) I had rather than have a barrel of ale	I hadde levere than a barel ale
Our Host said, "On my faith,	Oure Hooste seyde, "As I am feithful man,
And of Prudence and her goodness,	And of Prudence and hire benignytee,
When ended was my tale of Melibee,	Whan ended was my tale of Melibee,
The merry words of the Host to the Monk.	The murye Wordes of the Hoost to the Monk.
At once they kissed, and rode forth their way.	Anon they kiste, and ryden forth hir weye.
And, as we did, let us laugh and play."	And, as we diden, lat us laughe and pleye."
And Pardoner, I pray thee, draw thyself nearer,	And Pardoner, I prey thee, drawe thee neer,
I pray you that you kiss the Pardoner.	I prey yow that ye kisse the Pardoner.
And you, sir Host, who are so dear to me,	And ye, sire Hoost, that been to me so deere,
"No more of this, for it is right enough!	"Namoore of this, for it is right ynough!
When he saw that all the people laughed,	Whan that he saugh that al the peple lough,
But immediately the worthy Knight began,	But right anon the worthy Knyght bigan,
With thee, nor with any other angry man."	With thee, ne with noon oother angry man."
"Now," said our Host, "I will no longer joke	"Now," quod oure Hoost, "I wol no lenger pleye
So angry he was, no word would he say.	So wrooth he was, no word ne wolde he seye.
This Pardoner answered not a word;	This Pardoner answerde nat a word;
They shall be enshrined in a hog's turd!"	They shul be shryned in an hogges toord!"
Have them cut off, I will help thee carry them;	Lat kutte hem of, I wol thee helpe hem carie;
I would I had thy testicles in my hand	I wolde I hadde thy coillons in myn hond
But, by the cross that Saint Helen found,	But, by the croys which that Seint Eleyne fond,
Though it were stained by thy fundament!	Though it were with thy fundement depeint!
And swear it was a relic of a saint,	And swere it were a relyk of a seint,
Thou would make me kiss thine old underpants,	Thou woldest make me kisse thyn olde breech,
Let it be," he said, "it shall not be, as I may prosper!	Lat be," quod he, "it shal nat be, so theech!
"Nay, nay!" he said, "then I will have Christ's curse!	"Nay, nay!" quod he, "thanne have I Cristes curs!
Yea, for a fourpence coin! Unbuckle thy purse right now."	Ye, for a grote! Unbokele anon thy purs."
And thou shall kiss the relics every one,	And thou shalt kisse the relikes everychon,
For he is most enveloped in sin.	For he is moost envoluped in synne.
I advise that our Host here shall begin,	I rede that oure Hoost heere shal bigynne,
When the soul shall from the body pass.	Whan that the soule shal fro the body passe.
Who can absolve you, both more and less (every one),	That may assoille yow, bothe moore and lasse,
That I happen to be in your fellowship,	That I am in youre felaweshipe yfalle,
Look what a safeguard is it to you all	Looke which a seuretee is it to yow alle
Down off his horse and break his neck in two.	Doun of his hors and breke his nekke atwo.
Perhaps there may fall one or two	Paraventure ther may fallen oon or two
For accidents that may happen.	For aventures whiche that may bityde.
That you may have a pardoner with sufficient power	That ye mowe have a suffisant pardoneer
It is an honor to every one that is here	It is an honour to everich that is heer
Gold coins or silver pennies, which are good and true.	Nobles or pens, whiche that be goode and trewe.
Providing that you offer, again and again,	So that ye offren, alwey newe and newe,
All new and fresh at every mile's end,	Al newe and fressh at every miles ende,
Or else take pardon as you travel,	Or elles taketh pardoun as ye wende,
And meekly receive my pardon;	And mekely receyveth my pardoun;
Come forth straightway, and kneel down here,	Com forth anon, and kneleth heere adoun,
Offer and have my absolution,	Offren and han myn absolucion,
Which were given to me by the pope's hand.	Whiche were me yeven by the popes hond.
As fine as any man in England,	As faire as any man in Engelond,
I have relics and pardons in my bag,	I have relikes and pardoun in my male,
But, sirs, one word I forgot in my tale:	But, sires, o word forgat I in my tale:
For that is best; I will not deceive you.	For that is best; I wol yow nat deceyve.
So grant you to receive his pardon,	So graunte yow his pardoun to receyve,
And Jesus Christ, that is our souls' physician,	And Jhesu Crist, that is oure soules leche,
As you were born. -- And lo, sirs, thus I preach.	As ye were born. -- And lo, sires, thus I preche.
You who will offer, as clean and also as clear (of sin)	Yow that wol offre, as clene and eek as cleer
Into the bliss of heaven you shall go.	Into the blisse of hevene shul ye gon.
Your names I enter here in my roll immediately;	Youre names I entre heer in my rolle anon;
Come up, you wives, offer some of your wool!	Cometh up, ye wyves, offreth of youre wolle!
Bow your head under this holy papal bull!	Boweth youre heed under this hooly bulle!
Or else silver brooches, spoons, rings.	Or elles silver broches, spoones, rynges.
Providing that you offer gold coins or silver pennies,	So that ye offre nobles or sterlynges,
My holy pardon can cure you all,	Myn hooly pardoun may yow alle warice,
And guard yourselves from the sin of avarice!	And ware yow fro the synne of avarice!
Now, good men, God forgive you your trespass,	Now, goode men, God foryeve yow youre trespas,
And with his precious heart's blood redeemed thee,	And with his precious herte-blood thee boghte,
That to thy creator, who made thee	That to thy creatour, which that the wroghte
Alas, mankind, how may it happen	Allas, mankynde, how may it bitide
And great oaths, out of habit and out of pride!	And othes grete, of usage and of pride!
Thou blasphemer of Christ with churlish speech	Thou blasphemour of Crist with vileynye
O gluttony, lechery, and dicing!	O glotonye, luxurie, and hasardrye!
O treacherous homicide, O wickedness!	O traytours homycide, O wikkednesse!
O cursed sin of all cursedness!	O cursed synne of alle cursednesse!
And also the false poisoner as well.	And eek the false empoysonere also.
Than had these two wretches, before their ending.	Than hadde thise wrecches two, er hir endyng.
More wondrous symptoms of poisoning	Mo wonder signes of empoisonyng
Wrote never in any authoritative book, nor in any chapter,	Wroot nevere in no canon, ne in no fen,
But certainly, I suppose that Avicenna	But certes, I suppose that Avycen
For which straightway they died, both of the two.	For which anon they storven bothe two.
And drank, and gave his fellow drink also,	And drank, and yaf his felawe drynke also,
To take the bottle where the poison was,	To take the botel ther the poyson was,
And with that word it happened to him, by chance,	And with that word it happed hym, par cas,
And afterward we will bury his body."	And afterward we wol his body berie."
And when this was done, thus spoke that one:	And whan that this was doon, thus spak that oon:
Right so they have him slain, and that immediately.	Right so they han hym slayn, and that anon.
For right as they had planned his death before,	For right as they hadde cast his deeth bifoore,
What needs it to preach of it more?	What nedeth it to sermone of it moore?
He goes back again to his fellows.	To his felawes agayn repaireth he.
Had filled his three big bottles with wine,	Hadde filled with wyn his grete botels thre,
And when this rioter, bad luck to him,	And whan this riotour, with sory grace,
In carrying of the gold out of that place.	In cariynge of the gold out of that place.
For all the night he intended to work	For al the nyght he shoop hym for to swynke
And in the two he poured his poison;	And in the two his poyson poured he;
And borrowed [of] him three large bottles,	And borwed [of] hym large botelles thre,
Into the next street unto a man,	Into the nexte strete unto a man,
This poison in a box, and then he ran	This poysoun in a box, and sith he ran
This cursed man has in his hand taken	This cursed man hath in his hond yhent
This poison is so strong and violent."	This poysoun is so strong and violent."
Than thou will go at a walk but only a mile,	Than thou wolt goon a paas nat but a mile,
Yea, he shall die, and that in less time	Ye, sterve he shal, and that in lasse while
That he shall not immediately lose his life;	That he ne shal his lif anon forlete;
That has eaten or drunk of this concoction	That eten or dronken hath of this confiture
In all this world there is no creature	In al this world ther is no creature
A thing that, as God may save my soul,	A thyng that, also God my soule save,
The apothecary answered, "And thou shall have	The pothecarie answerde, "And thou shalt have
On vermin that ruined him by night.	On vermyn that destroyed hym by nyghte.
And he would gladly revenge himself, if he could,	And fayn he wolde wreke hym, if he myghte,
That, as he said, had slain his capons,	That, as he seyde, his capouns hadde yslawe,
And also there was a polecat in his yard,	And eek ther was a polcat in his hawe,
Some poison, that he might kill his rats;	Som poyson, that he myghte his rattes quelle;
Into the town, unto an apothecary,	Into the toun, unto a pothecarie,
And forth he goes, no longer would he tarry,	And forth he gooth, no lenger wolde he tarie,
To slay them both and never to repent.	To sleen hem bothe and nevere to repente.
For this was utterly his full intention,	For this was outrely his fulle entente,
That he had leave bring him to sorrow.	That he hadde leve him to sorwe brynge.
Because the fiend found him in such a manner of living	For-why the feend foond hym in swich lyvynge
With which he might slay his two fellows;	With which he myghte sleen his felawes tweye;
Put in his thought that he should buy poison,	Putte in his thought that he sholde poyson beye,
And at the last the fiend, our enemy,	And atte laste the feend, oure enemy,
There is no man that lives under the throne	Ther is no man that lyveth under the trone
Have all this treasure to myself alone,	Have al this tresor to myself allone,
"O Lord!" he said, "if it would be that I might	"O Lord!" quod he, "if so were that I myghte
The beauty of these florins new and bright.	The beautee of thise floryns newe and brighte.
Very often in heart he rolls up and down	Ful ofte in herte he rolleth up and doun
This youngest, who went to the town,	This yongeste, which that wente to the toun,
To slay the third, as you have heard me say.	To sleen the thridde, as ye han herd me seye.
And thus these two scoundrels are agreed	And thus acorded been thise shrewes tweye
And play at dice just as we wish,"	And pleye at dees right at oure owene wille."
My dear friend, between me and thee.	My deere freend, bitwixen me and thee.
And then shall all this gold be divided,	And thanne shal al this gold departed be,
And with thy dagger see that thou do the same;	And with thy daggere looke thou do the same;
While thou struggle with him as in game,	Whil that thou strogelest with hym as in game,
And I shall stab him through the two sides	And I shal ryve hym thurgh the sydes tweye
Arise as though thou would with him play,	Arys as though thou woldest with hym pleye,
Look, when he has set down, right away	Looke whan that he is set, that right anoon
And two of us shall be stronger than one.	And two of us shul strenger be than oon.
"Now," said the first, "thou knowest well we are two,	"Now," quod the firste, "thou woost wel we be tweye,
"I agree," said that other, "without doubt,	"I graunte," quod that oother, "out of doute,
What we shall do, and bring it well about."	What we shal doon, and brynge it wel aboute."
"And I shall tell in a few words	"And I shal tellen in a wordes fewe
"Shall it be (our) secret plan?" said the first scoundrel,	"Shal it be conseil?" seyde the firste shrewe,
What shall we do? What shall we say to him?"	What shal we doon? What shal we to hym seye?"
He knows that the gold is with us two;	He woot that the gold is with us tweye;
That other answered, "I know not how that can be.	That oother answerde, "I noot hou that may be.
Had I not done a good turn to thee?"	Hadde I nat doon a freendes torn to thee?"
That it were divided among us two,	That it departed were among us two,
That shall be divided among us three.	That shal departed been among us thre.
And here is gold, and that a full great quantity,	And heere is gold, and that ful greet plentee,
Thou knowest well that our fellow is gone.	Thou woost wel that oure felawe is agon.
Thy profit will I tell thee straightway.	Thy profit wol I telle thee anon.
"Thou knowest well thou art my sworn brother;	"Thow knowest wel thou art my sworen brother;
The one of them spoke thus unto that other:	That oon of hem spak thus unto that oother:
And as soon as he was gone,	And also soone as that he was gon,
And forth toward the town he went right away.	And forth toward the toun he wente anon.
And it fell on the youngest of them all,	And it fil on the yongeste of hem alle,
That one of them brought the straws in his fist,	That oon of hem the cut broghte in his fest,
By mutual agreement, where we think best."	By oon assent, where as us thynketh best."
When it is night, we will carry this treasure,	Whan it is nyght, we wol this tresor carie,
This treasure well; and if he will not tarry,	This tresor wel; and if he wol nat tarie,
And two of us shall carefully guard	And two of us shul kepen subtilly
And very secretly bring us bread and wine.	And brynge us breed and wyn ful prively.
Shall run to the town, and that very quickly,	Shal renne to the town, and that ful swithe,
And he who has the shortest straw with happy heart	And he that hath the cut with herte blithe
Be drawn, and let's see where the lot will fall;	Be drawe, and lat se wher the cut wol falle;
As wisely and as slyly as it can be.	As wisely and as slyly as it myghte.
This treasure must be carried by night	This tresor moste ycaried be by nyghte
And for our own treasure have us hanged.	And for oure owene tresor doon us honge.
Men would say that we were arrant thieves,	Men wolde seyn that we were theves stronge,
But truly, it may not be (done) by day.	But trewely, by daye it may nat bee.
Then we would be in great happiness.	Thanne were we in heigh felicitee.
For well you know that all this gold is ours --	For wel ye woot that al this gold is oures --
Home to my house, or else unto yours --	Hoom to myn hous, or elles unto youres --
But if this gold could be carried from this place	But myghte this gold be caried fro this place
Ah, God's precious dignity! Who would have supposed	Ey, Goddes precious dignitee! Who wende
And as easily as it comes, so will we spend it.	And lightly as it comth, so wol we spende.
In mirth and jollity to live our life,	In myrthe and joliftee oure lyf to lyven,
Fortune has given this treasure unto us	This tresor hath Fortune unto us yiven
My wit is great, though I jest and play.	My wit is greet, though that I bourde and pleye.
"Brethren," he said, "take heed of what I say;	"Bretheren," quod he, "taak kep what that I seye;
The worst of them, he spoke the first word.	The worste of hem, he spak the firste word.
That they set themselves down by this precious hoard.	That doun they sette hem by this precious hoord.
Because the florins are so faire and bright,	For that the floryns been so faire and brighte,
No longer then after Death they sought,	No lenger thanne after Deeth they soughte,
Well nigh eight bushels, as they thought.	Wel ny an eighte busshels, as hem thoughte.
Of fine round florins of coined gold	Of floryns fyne of gold ycoyned rounde
Until he came to that tree, and there they found	Til he cam to that tree, and ther they founde
And every one of these rioters ran	And everich of thise riotoures ran
And amend you!" Thus said this old man;	And yow amende!" Thus seyde this olde man;
God save you, He who redeemed mankind,	God save yow, that boghte agayn mankynde,
Do you see that oak? Right there you shall find him.	Se ye that ook? Right there ye shal hym fynde.
He will not in any way hide himself because of your boast.	Noght for youre boost he wole him no thyng hyde.
For in that grove I left him, by my faith,	For in that grove I lafte hym, by my fey,
To find Death, turn up this crooked way,	To fynde Deeth, turne up this croked wey,
"Now, sirs," said he, "if you are so eager	"Now, sires," quod he, "if that yow be so leef
To slay us young folk, thou false thief!"	To sleen us yonge folk, thou false theef!"
For truly thou art in league with him	For soothly thou art oon of his assent
By God and by the holy sacrament!	By God and by the hooly sacrement!
Tell where he is or thou shall pay for it,	Telle where he is or thou shalt it abye,
Have here my pledge, as thou art his spy,	Have heer my trouthe, as thou art his espye,
That slays all our friends in this country.	That in this contree alle oure freendes sleeth.
"Thou depart not so quickly, by Saint John!	"Thou partest nat so lightly, by Seint John!
Said this other dice-player quickly;	Seyde this oother hasardour anon;
"Nay, old churl, by God, thou shall not so,"	"Nay, olde cherl, by God, thou shalt nat so,"
I must go thither where I have to go."	I moot go thider as I have to go."
And God be with you, wherever you walk or ride!	And God be with yow, where ye go or ryde!
In old age, if you live so long.	In age, if that ye so longe abyde.
No more than you would want men to do to you	Namoore than that ye wolde men did to yow
Do no harm now unto an old man,	Ne dooth unto an oold man noon harm now,
You should rise;' therefore I give you advice,	Ye sholde arise;' wherfore I yeve yow reed,
In Holy Writ you may yourself well read:	In Hooly Writ ye may yourself wel rede:
Unless he trespass in word or else in deed.	But he trespasse in word or elles in dede.
To speak rudeness to an old man,	To speken to an old man vileynye,
"But, sirs, to you it is no courtesy	"But, sires, to yow it is no curteisye
For which full pale and withered is my face.	For which ful pale and welked is my face.
But yet to me she will not do that favor,	But yet to me she wol nat do that grace,
Yea, for an hair shirt to wrap me!'	Ye, for an heyre clowt to wrappe me!'
That in my chamber long time has been,	That in my chambre longe tyme hath be,
Mother, with you would I exchange my strongbox	Mooder, with yow wolde I chaunge my cheste
Lo how I waste away, flesh, and blood, and skin!	Lo how I vanysshe, flessh, and blood, and skyn!
And say `Dear mother, let me in!	And seye `Leeve mooder, leet me in!
I knock with my staff, both early and late,	I knokke with my staf, bothe erly and late,
And on the ground, which is my mother's gate,	And on the ground, which is my moodres gate,
Thus I walk, like a restless wretch,	Thus walke I, lyk a restelees kaityf,
Nor Death, alas, will not have my life.	Ne Deeth, allas, ne wol nat han my lyf.
As long a time as it is God's will.	As longe tyme as it is Goddes wille.
And therefore I must have my age still,	And therfore moot I han myn age stille,
That would change his youth for my age;	That wolde chaunge his youthe for myn age;
A man, though I walked to India,	A man, though that I walked into Ynde,
And said thus: "Because I can not find	And seyde thus: "For I ne kan nat fynde
This old man did look in his face,	This olde man gan looke in his visage,
Why live thou so long in such old age?"	Why lyvestow so longe in so greet age?"
Why art thou all wrapped up except for thy face?	Why artow al forwrapped save thy face?
Answered in reply, "What, churl, bad luck to you!	Answerde agayn, "What, carl, with sory grace!
The proudest of these three rioters	The proudeste of thise riotoures three
And said thus, "Now, lords, may God look after you!"	And seyde thus, "Now, lordes, God yow see!"
This old man full meekly greeted them,	This olde man ful mekely hem grette,
Right as they would have stepped over a fence,	Right as they wolde han troden over a stile,
When they have gone not fully half a mile,	Whan they han goon nat fully half a mile,
Death shall be dead, if they can catch him!	Deeth shal be deed, if that they may hym hente!
And Christ's blessed body they tore to pieces --	And Cristes blessed body they torente --
And many a grisly oath then have they sworn,	And many a grisly ooth thanne han they sworn,
Of which the tavern-keeper had spoken before.	Of which the taverner hadde spoke biforn.
And forth they go towards that village	And forth they goon towardes that village
And up they leaped, all drunken in this rage,	And up they stirte, al dronken in this rage,
As though he were his own born brother.	As though he were his owene ybore brother.
Together have these three pledged their troths	Togidres han thise thre hir trouthes plight
By God's dignity, before it be night!"	By Goddes dignitee, er it be nyght!"
He shall be slain, he who slays so many,	He shal be slayn, he that so manye sleeth,
And we will slay this false traitor Death.	And we wol sleen this false traytour Deeth.
And each of us become the others' brother,	And ech of us bicomen otheres brother,
Let each of us hold up his hand to other,	Lat ech of us holde up his hand til oother,
Listen, fellows, we three are all agreed;	Herkneth, felawes, we thre been al ones;
I make a vow to God's honorable bones!	I make avow to Goddes digne bones!
I shall seek him by path-way and also by street (everywhere),	I shal hym seke by wey and eek by strete,
"Yea, God's arms!" said this rioter,	"Ye, Goddes armes!" quod this riotour,
Before he did a man any harm."	Er that he dide a man a dishonour."
It would be great wisdom to be forewarned,	To been avysed greet wysdom it were,
I suppose his habitation is there.	I trowe his habitacioun be there.
Both man and woman, child, and laborer, and servant boy;	Bothe man and womman, child, and hyne, and page;
Over a mile from here, within a great village,	Henne over a mile, withinne a greet village,
"The child says truth, for he has slain this year,	"The child seith sooth, for he hath slayn this yeer,
"By Saint Mary!" said this tavern-keeper,	"By Seinte Marie!" seyde this taverner,
Thus taught me my mother; I say no more."	Thus taughte me my dame; I sey namoore."
To beware of such an adversary.	For to be war of swich an adversarie.
It seems to me that it would be necessary	Me thynketh that it were necessarie
And, master, before you come in his presence,	And, maister, er ye come in his presence,
He has slain a thousand (during) this pestilence.	He hath a thousand slayn this pestilence.
And went his way without more words.	And wente his wey withouten wordes mo.
And with his spear he struck his heart in two,	And with his spere he smoot his herte atwo,
Who slays all the people in this country,	That in this contree al the peple sleeth,
There came a stealthy thief men call Death,	Ther cam a privee theef men clepeth Deeth,
Completely drunk, as he sat on his bench upright.	Fordronke, as he sat on his bench upright.
He was, indeed, an old fellow of yours,	He was, pardee, an old felawe of youres,
It was told me two hours before you came here.	It was me toold er ye cam heer two houres.
"Sir," said this boy, "that is not at all necessary;	"Sire," quod this boy, "it nedeth never-a-deel;
And see that thou report his name correctly."	And looke that thou reporte his name weel."
What corpse is this that passes by here;	What cors is this that passeth heer forby;
"Go quickly," he said, "and ask at once	"Go bet," quod he, "and axe redily
The one of them did call to his servant:	That oon of hem gan callen to his knave:
Before a corpse, which was carried to its grave.	Biforn a cors, was caried to his grave.
And as they sat, they heard a bell clink	And as they sat, they herde a belle clynke
Long before prime rang of any bell,	Longe erst er prime rong of any belle,
These three rioters of whom I tell,	Thise riotoures thre of whiche I telle,
But, sirs, now will I tell forth my tale.	But, sires, now wol I telle forth my tale.
Leave your oaths, both great and small.	Lete youre othes, bothe grete and smale.
Now, for the love of Christ, who for us died,	Now, for the love of Crist, that for us dyde,
Perjury, anger, falseness, homicide.	Forsweryng, ire, falsnesse, homycide.
This fruit comes of the two cursed dice,	This fruyt cometh of the bicched bones two,
This dagger shall go throughout thy heart!" --	This daggere shal thurghout thyn herte go!" --
"By God's arms, if thou falsely play,	"By Goddes armes, if thou falsly pleye,
And "By the blood of Christ that is in Hales Abbey,	And "By the blood of Crist that is in Hayles,
"By God's precious heart," and "By his nails,"	"By Goddes precious herte," and "By his nayles,"
Who of his oaths is too excessive.	That of his othes is to outrageous.
That vengeance shall not part from his house	That vengeance shal nat parten from his hous
And furthermore, I will tell thee flatly	And forther over, I wol thee telle al plat
How that is the second command of God.	How that the seconde heeste of God is that.
He who understands his commandments knows this,	This knoweth, that his heestes understondeth,
I say that, so far as order is concerned, thus it stands;	I seye that, as by ordre, thus it stondeth;
Than homicide or many a cursed thing;	Than homycide or many a cursed thyng;
"Take not my name in vain nor amiss."	"Take nat my name in ydel or amys."
How the second of his commands is this:	Hou that the seconde heeste of hym is this:
Of high God's honorable commandments,	Of heighe Goddes heestes honurable,
Behold and see that in the first three	Bihoold and se that in the firste table
But idle swearing is a cursed thing.	But ydel sweryng is a cursednesse.
And in judgement and also in righteousness";	And swere in doom and eek in rightwisnesse";
"Thou shall swear truly thine oaths, and not lie,	"Thou shalt swere sooth thyne othes, and nat lye,
Of swearing says the holy Jeremiah,	Of sweryng seith the hooly Jeremye,
Witness on Matthew; but in special	Witnesse on Mathew; but in special
And false swearing is yet more worthy of reproof.	And fals sweryng is yet moore reprevable.
Great swearing is an abominable thing,	Gret sweryng is a thyng abhominable,
A word or two, as old books treat them.	A word or two, as olde bookes trete.
Now will I speak of oaths false and great	Now wol I speke of othes false and grete
Respectable enough to pass the time.	Honest ynough to dryve the day awey.
Lords may find other sorts of play	Lordes may fynden oother maner pley
At no value or esteem.	At no value or reputacioun.
For which he held his glory or his renown	For which he heeld his glorie or his renoun
Because he had played at dicing before that;	For he hadde used hasard ther-biforn;
The king of Parthia, as the book tells us,	The kyng of Parthes, as the book seith us,
Consider also that to the king Demetrius	Looke eek that to the kyng Demetrius
This wise philosopher, thus said he.	This wise philosophre, thus seyde hee.
By my will, nor by my negotiation."	As by my wyl, ne as by my tretee."
Shall not ally yourselves with dice-players	Shul nat allyen yow with hasardours
For you, that are so glorious in honors,	For ye, that been so glorious in honours,
Than I should ally you to dice-players.	Than I yow sholde to hasardours allye.
For, by my troth, I would rather die	For, by my trouthe, me were levere dye
Send other wise ambassadors;	Sendeth othere wise embassadours;
Nor will I take on me so great infamy,	Ne I wol nat take on me so greet defame,
And said, "There I will not lose my reputation,	And seyde, "Ther wol I nat lese my name,
He stole home again to his country,	He stal hym hoom agayn to his contree,
For which, as soon as it could be,	For which, as soone as it myghte be,
Playing at dice he found them.	Pleyynge atte hasard he hem fond.
That all the greatest men that were of that land,	That alle the gretteste that were of that lond,
And when he came, it happened, by chance,	And whan he cam, hym happede, par chaunce,
From Sparta to make their alliance.	Fro Lacidomye to make hire alliaunce.
Was sent to Corinth in very great honor	Was sent to Corynthe in ful greet honour
Held the less in reputation.	Yholde the lasse in reputacioun.
He is, by common opinion,	He is, as by commune opinioun,
In all governance and policy	In alle governaunce and policye
If a prince plays at dicing,	If that a prynce useth hasardrye,
The more is he considered abandoned (to shame).	The moore is he yholden desolaat.
And ever the higher he is of estate,	And ever the hyer he is of estaat,
To be considered a common dice player.	For to ben holde a commune hasardour.
It is a disgrace and contrary to honor	It is repreeve and contrarie of honour
Of possessions and of time; and furthermore,	Of catel and of tyme; and forthermo,
And of deceit, and cursed perjuries,	And of deceite, and cursed forswerynges,
Dicing is the true mother of lies,	Hasard is verray mooder of lesynges,
Now I will forbid you gambling.	Now wol I yow deffenden hasardrye.
And now that I have spoken of gluttony,	And now that I have spoken of glotonye,
No more of this, for it may well suffice.	Namoore of this, for it may wel suffise.
About giving wine to those that have the duty of doing justice.	Of wyn-yevyng to hem that han justise.
Read the Bible, and find it explicitly	Redeth the Bible, and fynde it expresly
Not Samuel, but Lamuel, I say;	Nat Samuel, but Lamuel, seye I;
What was commanded unto Lamuel --	What was comaunded unto Lamuel --
A captain should live in sobriety.	A capitayn sholde lyve in sobrenesse.
Bleeding ever at his nose in drunkenness.	Bledynge ay at his nose in dronkenesse.
Died in his sleep, with shame and dishonor,	Deyde in his sleep, with shame and dishonour,
Consider how Attila, the great conqueror,	Looke, Attilla, the grete conquerour,
Look in the Bible, and there you can learn it.	Looketh the Bible, and ther ye may it leere.
Were done in abstinence and in prayer.	Were doon in abstinence and in preyere.
Through true God, who is omnipotent,	Thurgh verray God, that is omnipotent,
Of victories in the Old Testament,	Of victories in the Olde Testament,
That all the great deeds, I dare say,	That alle the sovereyn actes, dar I seye,
And then will he say "Sampson, Sampson!"	And thanne wol he seye "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"
Not at La Rochelle, nor at Bordeaux town --	Nat at the Rochele, ne at Burdeux toun --
He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe --	He is in Spaigne, right at the toune of Lepe --
And supposes that he is at home in Cheapside,	And weneth that he be at hoom in Chepe,
That when a man has drunk three drafts,	That whan a man hath dronken draughtes thre,
Of which there rise such bodily vapors	Of which ther ryseth swich fumositee
Into other wines, growing near by,	In othere wynes, growynge faste by,
This wine of Spain creeps subtly	This wyn of Spaigne crepeth subtilly
That is for sale in Fishstreet or in Cheapside.	That is to selle in Fysshstrete or in Chepe.
Now guard yourself from the white and from the red,	Now kepe yow fro the white and fro the rede,
He can keep no secrets; there is no doubt.	He kan no conseil kepe; it is no drede.
In whom drink has domination	In whom that drynke hath dominacioun
Of man's wit and his discretion.	Of mannes wit and his discrecioun.
For drunkenness is truly the sepulcher	For dronkenesse is verray sepulture
Thy tongue is lost, and all thy care for decency,	Thy tonge is lost, and al thyn honeste cure,
Thou fallest like a stuck pig;	Thou fallest as it were a styked swyn;
And yet, God knows, Sampson never drank any wine.	And yet, God woot, Sampsoun drank nevere no wyn.
As though thou said always "Sampson, Sampson!"	As though thou seydest ay "Sampsoun, Sampsoun!"
Sour is thy breath, foul art thou to embrace,	Sour is thy breeth, foul artow to embrace,
O drunken man, disfigured is thy face,	O dronke man, disfigured is thy face,
Is full of striving and of wretchedness.	Is ful of stryvyng and of wrecchednesse.
A lecherous thing is wine, and drunkenness	A lecherous thyng is wyn, and dronkenesse
Is dead, while he lives in those vices.	Is deed, whil that he lyveth in tho vices.
But, certainly, he who habitually seeks such delicacies	But, certes, he that haunteth swiche delices
To make him yet a newer appetite.	To make hym yet a newer appetit.
Shall his sauce be made for delight,	Shal been his sauce ymaked by delit,
Of seasonings of leaf, and bark, and root	Of spicerie of leef, and bark, and roote
The marrow, for they throw nothing away	The mary, for they caste noght awey
Out of the hard bones they knock	Out of the harde bones knokke they
To fulfill all thy gluttonous desire!	To fulfille al thy likerous talent!
And turn substance into outward appearance	And turnen substaunce into accident
These cooks, how they pound, and strain, and grind,	Thise cookes, how they stampe, and streyne, and grynde,
How great labor and cost it is to feed thee!	How greet labour and cost is thee to fynde!
At either end of thee the sound is foul.	At either ende of thee foul is the soun.
Filled with dung and with corruption!	Fulfilled of dong and of corrupcioun!
O gut! O belly! O stinking bag,	O wombe! O bely! O stynkyng cod,
They are enemies of Christ's cross,	They been enemys of Cristes croys,
I say it now weeping, with piteous voice --	I seye it now wepyng, with pitous voys --
"There walk many of whom I have told you --	"Ther walken manye of whiche yow toold have I --
The apostle weeping says full piteously,	The apostel wepyng seith ful pitously,
Through that same cursed excess.	Thurgh thilke cursed superfluitee.
That he makes his privy of his throat	That of his throte he maketh his pryvee
When man so drinks of the white and red	Whan man so drynketh of the white and rede
To say this word, and fouler is the deed,	To seye this word, and fouler is the dede,
Alas, a foul thing it is, by my faith,	Allas, a foul thyng is it, by my feith,
"Food unto belly, and belly also unto food,	"Mete unto wombe, and wombe eek unto mete,
Of this matter, O Paul, well can thou treat	Of this matiere, O Paul, wel kanstow trete:
To get a glutton dainty food and drink!	To gete a glotoun deyntee mete and drynke!
In earth, in air, in water, men work	In erthe, in eir, in water, men to swynke
Makes that east and west and north and south,	Maketh that est and west and north and south,
Alas, the short throat, the tender mouth,	Allas, the shorte throte, the tendre mouth,
Of his diet, sitting at his table.	Of his diete, sittynge at his table.
He would be the more moderate	He wolde been the moore mesurable
Follow of excess and of gluttony,	Folwen of excesse and of glotonyes,
O gluttony, on thee well we ought to complain!	O glotonye, on thee wel oghte us pleyne!
Immediately he was cast out to woe and pain.	Anon he was out cast to wo and peyne.
Ate of the forbidden fruit on the tree,	Eet of the fruyt deffended on the tree,
He was in Paradise; and when he	He was in Paradys; and whan that he
For while Adam fasted, as I read,	For whil that Adam fasted, as I rede,
Were driven for that vice, there is no doubt.	Were dryven for that vice, it is no drede.
From Paradise to labor and to woe	Fro Paradys to labour and to wo
Adam our fader, and his wife also,	Adam oure fader, and his wyf also,
Corrupt was all this world for gluttony.	Corrupt was al this world for glotonye.
Lo, how dearly, shortly to say,	Lo, how deere, shortly for to sayn,
Until Christ had bought us with his blood again!	Til Crist hadde boght us with his blood agayn!
O origin of our damnation,	O original of oure dampnacioun,
O first cause of our ruin!	O cause first of oure confusioun!
O gluttony, full of cursedness!	O glotonye, ful of cursednesse!
Lasts longer than does drunkenness.	Persevereth lenger than doth dronkenesse.
Except that madness, fallen in an evil person,	But that woodnesse, yfallen in a shrewe,
And a man that is drunk,	And a man which that is dronkelewe,
Between a man that is out of his mind	Bitwix a man that is out of his mynde
Seneca says a good word, doubtless;	Senec seith a good word doutelees;
To slay John the Baptist, full guiltless.	To sleen the Baptist John, ful giltelees.
Right at his own table he gave his command	Right at his owene table he yaf his heeste
When he was filled with wine at his feast,	Whan he of wyn was repleet at his feeste,
Herod, whoever should seek well the histories (would learn),	Herodes, whoso wel the stories soghte,
So drunk he was, he knew not what he did.	So dronke he was, he nyste what he wroghte.
Lay by his two daughters, unwittingly;	Lay by his doghtres two, unwityngly;
Lo, how that drunken Lot, unnaturally,	Lo, how that dronken Looth, unkyndely,
That lechery is in wine and drunkenness.	That luxurie is in wyn and dronkenesse.
That is joined unto gluttony.	That is annexed unto glotonye.
To kindle and blow the fire of lechery,	To kyndle and blowe the fyr of lecherye,
Which are the very devil's officers	Whiche been the verray develes officeres
Singers with harps, bawds, girls selling wafers,	Syngeres with harpes, baudes, wafereres,
Elegantly shaped and slim, and girls selling fruits,	Fetys and smale, and yonge frutesteres,
And right away then come dancing girls	And right anon thanne comen tombesteres
And each of them laughed at the other's sin.	And ech of hem at otheres synne lough.
They thought that the Jews did not tear him enough --	Hem thoughte that Jewes rente hym noght ynough --
Our blessed Lord's body they tore in pieces --	Oure blissed Lordes body they totere --
Their oaths are so great and so damnable	Hir othes been so grete and so dampnable
By abominable excess.	By superfluytee abhomynable.
Within that devil's temple in cursed manner	Withinne that develes temple in cursed wise
Through which they do the devil sacrifice	Thurgh which they doon the devel sacrifise
And also eat and drink beyond their capacity,	And eten also and drynken over hir myght,
They dance and play at dice both day and night,	They daunce and pleyen at dees bothe day and nyght,
Where with harps, lutes, and guitars,	Where as with harpes, lutes, and gyternes,
Such as debauchery, gambling, brothels, and taverns,	As riot, hasard, stywes, and tavernes,
Of young folk who practiced folly,	Of yonge folk that haunteden folye,
Here begins the Pardoner's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Pardoners Tale.
Now hold your peace! My tale I will begin."	Now hoold youre pees! My tale I wol bigynne."
Which I am accustomed to preach in order to profit.	Which I am wont to preche for to wynne.
Yet I can tell you a moral tale,	A moral tale yet I yow telle kan,
For though myself be a very vicious man,	For though myself be a ful vicious man,
That shall, for good reason, be to your liking.	That shal by reson been at youre likyng.
By God, I hope I shall tell you a thing	By God, I hope I shal yow telle a thyng
Now I have drunk a draft of strong ale,	Now have I dronke a draughte of corny ale,
Your desire is that I shall tell a tale.	Youre likyng is that I shal telle a tale.
And have a pretty wench in every town.	And have a joly wenche in every toun.
Nay, I will drink liquor of the vine	Nay, I wol drynke licour of the vyne
Even though her children should die of hunger.	Al sholde hir children sterve for famyne.
Or by the poorest widow in a village,	Or of the povereste wydwe in a village,
Although it were given by the poorest servant boy,	Al were it yeven of the povereste page,
I will have money, wool, cheese, and wheat,	I wol have moneie, wolle, chese, and whete,
I will imitate none of the apostles;	I wol noon of the apostles countrefete;
Because I will not beg idly.	By cause I wol nat beggen ydelly.
Nor make baskets and live thereby,	Ne make baskettes and lyve therby,
For I will preach and beg in various lands;	For I wol preche and begge in sondry landes;
Nay, nay, I never thought it, truly!	Nay, nay, I thoghte it nevere, trewely!
That I will live in poverty voluntarily?	That I wol lyve in poverte wilfully?
And win gold and silver because I teach,	And wynne gold and silver for I teche,
What, do you suppose, that while I can preach,	What, trowe ye, that whiles I may preche,
Such things they can well repeat and hold in memory.	Swiche thynges kan they wel reporte and holde.
For ignorant people love old tales;	For lewed peple loven tales olde;
Of old stories from long time ago.	Of olde stories longe tyme agoon.
"Then I tell them illustrative tales many a one	"Thanne telle I hem ensamples many oon
I preach nothing but for greed.	I preche nothyng but for coveitise.
But that is not my principal intention;	But that is nat my principal entente;
From avarice and bitterly to repent.	From avarice and soore to repente.
Yet I can make other folk to turn away	Yet kan I maken oother folk to twynne
But though myself be guilty of that sin,	But though myself be gilty in that synne,
Which I use, and that is avarice.	Which that I use, and that is avarice.
Thus I can preach against that same vice	Thus kan I preche agayn that same vice
`Greed is the root of all evil.'	Radix malorum est Cupiditas.
Therefore my theme is yet, and ever was,	Therfore my theme is yet, and evere was,
"But shortly my intention I will tell:	"But shortly myn entente I wol devyse:
Of holinesses, to seem holy and true.	Of hoolynesse, to semen hooly and trewe.
Thus I spit out my venom under hue	Thus spitte I out my venym under hewe
Thus I repay folk who make trouble for us pardoners;	Thus quyte I folk that doon us displesances;
By signs, and by other details.	By signes, and by othere circumstances.
Men shall well know that it is the same,	Men shal wel knowe that it is the same,
For though I tell not his proper name,	For though I telle noght his propre name,
Has trespassed to my brethren or to me.	Hath trespased to my bretheren or to me.
To be defamed falsely, if he	To been defamed falsly, if that he
Then I will sting him with my sharp tongue	Thanne wol I stynge hym with my tonge smerte
For when I dare debate no other ways,	For whan I dar noon oother weyes debate,
And some for vain glory, and some for hate.	And som for veyne glorie, and som for hate.
To be advanced by hypocrisy,	To been avaunced by ypocrisye,
Some for pleasure of folk and flattery,	Som for plesance of folk and flaterye,
Comes often times from an evil intention;	Comth ofte tyme of yvel entencioun;
For certainly, many a sermon	For certes, many a predicacioun
Though their souls go picking blackberries!	Though that hir soules goon a-blakeberyed!
I care not a bit, when they are buried,	I rekke nevere, whan that they been beryed,
For my intention is only to make a profit,	For myn entente is nat but for to wynne,
To give their pennies, and namely unto me.	To yeven hir pens, and namely unto me.
Is all my preaching, to make them generous	Is al my prechyng, for to make hem free
Of avarice and of such cursedness	Of avarice and of swich cursednesse
That it is joy to see my business.	That it is joye to se my bisynesse.
My hands and my tongue go so quickly	Myne handes and my tonge goon so yerne
As does a dove sitting on a barn.	As dooth a dowve sittynge on a berne.
And east and west upon the people I nod,	And est and west upon the peple I bekke,
Then I take pains to stretch forth the neck,	Thanne peyne I me to strecche forth the nekke,
I preach as you have heard before	I preche so as ye han herd bifoore
And when the ignorant people are set down,	And whan the lewed peple is doun yset,
I stand like a clerk in my pulpit,	I stonde lyk a clerk in my pulpet,
An hundred marks since I was pardoner.	An hundred mark sith I was pardoner.
"By this trick have I won, year after year,	"By this gaude have I wonne, yeer by yeer,
Which by papal bull was granted to me.'	Which that by bulle ygraunted was to me.'
And I will absolve him by the authority	And I assoille him by the auctoritee
He will come up and offer in God's name,	He wol come up and offre a Goddes name,
And whoever finds himself out of such blame,	And whoso fyndeth hym out of swich blame,
Such folk shall have no power nor no grace	Swich folk shal have no power ne no grace
Who has made her husband cuckold,	That hath ymaked hir housbonde cokewold,
Or any woman, be she young or old,	Or any womman, be she yong or old,
Dare not, for shame, be confessed of it,	Dar nat, for shame, of it yshryven be,
Who has done such horrible sin, that he	That hath doon synne horrible, that he
If any person be in this church now	If any wight be in this chirche now
`Good men and women, one thing I warn you:	`Goode men and wommen, o thyng warne I yow:
Providing that he offer pennies, or else fourpences.	So that he offre pens, or elles grotes.
When he has sown, be it wheat or oats,	Whan he hath sowen, be it whete or otes,
He that will put his hand in this mitten,	He that his hand wol putte in this mitayn,
`Here is a mitten also, that you may see.	`Heere is a miteyn eek, that ye may se.
Although she had taken two or three priests.	Al had she taken prestes two or thre.
Though he knew the truth of her misdeed,	Though he the soothe of hir defaute wiste,
And he shall never more mistrust his wife,	And nevere shal he moore his wyf mystriste,
Have his potage made with this water,	Lat maken with this water his potage,
For though a man be fallen in jealous rage,	For though a man be falle in jalous rage,
`And, sirs, it also heals jealousy;	`And, sires, also it heeleth jalousie;
His beasts and his possessions shall multiply.	His beestes and his stoor shal multiplie.
Fasting, drink of this well a draft,	Fastynge, drynken of this welle a draughte,
Will every week, before the cock crows,	Wol every wyke, er that the cok hym croweth,
If the householder who owns the beasts	If that the good-man that the beestes oweth
Drinks a draft. Take heed also what I say:	Drynketh a draughte. Taak kep eek what I telle:
Every sheep shall be whole that of this well	Shal every sheep be hool that of this welle
Of pocks and of scab, and every sore	Of pokkes and of scabbe, and every soore
And it is whole right away; and furthermore,	And it is hool anon; and forthermoore,
Take water of that well and wash its tongue,	Taak water of that welle and wassh his tonge,
That any worm has eaten, or worm stung,	That any worm hath ete, or worm ystonge,
If this bone be washed in any well,	If that this boon be wasshe in any welle,
`Good men,' I say, `take heed of my words;	`Goode men,' I seye, `taak of my wordes keep;
Which was of a holy Jew's sheep.	Which that was of an hooly Jewes sheep.
Then I have mounted in latten (brass-like alloy) a shoulder-bone	Thanne have I in latoun a sholder-boon
Relics they are, as suppose they each one.	Relikes been they, as wenen they echoon.
Crammed full of rags and of bones --	Ycrammed ful of cloutes and of bones --
Then I show forth my long crystal stones,	Thanne shewe I forth my longe cristal stones,
And to stir them to devotion.	And for to stire hem to devocioun.
With which to add spice to my preaching,	To saffron with my predicacioun,
Of patriarchs and bishops I show,	Of patriarkes and bishopes I shewe,
Indulgences of popes and of cardinals,	Bulles of popes and of cardynales,
And after that then I tell forth my tales;	And after that thanne telle I forth my tales;
To hinder me from (doing) Christ's holy work.	Me to destourbe of Cristes hooly werk.
So that no man be so bold, neither priest nor clerk,	That no man be so boold, ne preest ne clerk,
I show that first, to protect my body,	That shewe I first, my body to warente,
Our liege lord's seal on my letter of authorization,	Oure lige lordes seel on my patente,
And then my papal bulls I show, each and every one.	And thanne my bulles shewe I, alle and some.
"First I pronounce from whence I come,	"First I pronounce whennes that I come,
My theme is always the same, and ever was --	My theme is alwey oon, and evere was --
For I know all by rote that I tell.	For I kan al by rote that I telle.
And ring it out as round as goes a belle,	And rynge it out as round as gooth a belle,
I take pains to have a loud voice,	I peyne me to han an hauteyn speche,
"Gentlemen," he said, "in churches when I preach,	"Lordynges," quod he, "in chirches whan I preche,
Here follows the Prologue of the Pardoner's Tale.	Heere folweth the Prologe of the Pardoners Tale.
About some respectable thing while I drink."	Upon som honest thyng while that I drynke."
"I agree, indeed," said he, "but I must think	"I graunte, ywis," quod he, "but I moot thynke
Some useful knowledge, and then will we gladly hear."	Som wit, and thanne wol we gladly heere."
"Nay, let him tell us of no ribaldry!	"Nay, lat hym telle us of no ribaudye!
But right away these gentlefolk began to cry,	But right anon thise gentils gonne to crye,
I will both drink and eat of a cake."	I wol bothe drynke and eten of a cake."
But first," said he, "here at this ale stake (tavern sign)	But first," quod he, "heere at this alestake
"It shall be done," said he, "by Saint Ronyon!	"It shal be doon," quod he, "by Seint Ronyon!
"Tell us some mirth or comic tales right away."	"Telle us som myrthe or japes right anon."
Thou fair friend (rascal), thou Pardoner," he said,	Thou beel amy, thou Pardoner," he sayde,
My heart is lost for pity of this maid.	Myn herte is lost for pitee of this mayde.
Or unless I hear right now a merry tale,	Or but I heere anon a myrie tale,
By corpus' bones! unless I have medicine,	By corpus bones! but I have triacle,
That I almost have caught a palpitation of the heart.	That I almoost have caught a cardynacle.
But well I know thou makes mine heart to grieve so,	But wel I woot thou doost myn herte to erme,
Said I not well? I can not speak in technical terms;	Seyde I nat wel? I kan nat speke in terme;
And like a prelate, by Saint Ronyan!	And lyk a prelat, by Seint Ronyan!
As I may prosper, thou art a proper man,	So moot I theen, thou art a propre man,
God bless them, and our lady Saint Mary!	God blesse hem, and oure lady Seinte Marie!
And every container full of thy electuaries;	And every boyste ful of thy letuarie;
Thine ipocras, and also thy galiones (medicines),	Thyn ypocras, and eek thy galiones,
I pray to God so save thy gentle body,	I pray to God so save thy gentil cors,
But nonetheless, pass over; is does not matter.	But nathelees, passe over; is no fors.
This is a pitiful tale to hear.	This is a pitous tale for to heere.
But truly, mine own master dear,	But trewely, myn owene maister deere,
Men have very often more harm than benefit.	Men han ful ofte moore for harm than prow.
Of both gifts that I speak of now	Of bothe yiftes that I speke of now
Alas, so pitifully as she was slain!	Allas, so pitously as she was slayn!
Her beauty was her death, I dare well say.	Hire beautee was hire deth, I dar wel sayn.
Are cause of death to many a creature.	Been cause of deeth to many a creature.
Therefore I say that every day men may see	Wherfore I seye al day that men may see
Alas, too dearly she paid for her beauty!	Allas, to deere boughte she beautee!
At any rate, this innocent maid is slain, alas!	Algate this sely mayde is slayn, allas!
Come to these judges and their advocates!	Come to thise juges and hire advocatz!
As shameful a death as heart can devise	As shameful deeth as herte may devyse
This was a false churl and a false judge.	This was a fals cherl and a fals justise.
"Alas!" said he, "by (Christ's) nails and by (His) blood!	"Harrow!" quod he, "by nayles and by blood!
Our Host began to swear as if he was crazy;	Oure Hooste gan to swere as he were wood;
The words of the host to the physician and pardoner.	The wordes of the Hoost to the Phisicien and Pardoner.
And with that word he said in this manner.	And with that word he seyde in this manere.
Say what you wish, and we will gladly hear."	Sey what yow list, and we wol gladly heere."
And to do well God send you his grace!	And to do wel God sende yow his grace!
Be fruitful, and that in little time,	Beth fructuous, and that in litel space,
But make haste; the sun is about to go down;	But hasteth yow; the sonne wole adoun;
Tell," said he, "your meditation.	Telleth," quod he, "youre meditacioun.
"Sire priest," said he, "now may good fortune come to you!	"Sire preest," quod he, "now faire yow bifalle!
Our Host had the words for us all;	Oure Hoost hadde the wordes for us alle;
That we all pray him to tell his tale.	That alle we to telle his tale hym preye.
And to give him time and attention,	And for to yeve hym space and audience,
To end in some virtuous subject matter,	To enden in som vertuous sentence,
For, as it seemed, it was the best to do --	For, as it seemed, it was for to doone --
Upon this word we have quickly assented,	Upon this word we han assented soone,
That I will be subject to correction."	That I wol stonde to correccioun."
Therefore I make this declaration	Therfore I make protestacioun
I take from them only the meaning, trust well.	I take but the sentence, trusteth weel.
By clerks, for I am not learned in texts;	Of clerkes, for I am nat textueel;
I put it ever subject to correction	I putte it ay under correccioun
To tell your decision; I can say nothing better.	Telle youre avys; I kan no bettre seye.
Begin my tale, for which I pray you	Bigynne upon my tale, for which I preye
And if you agree, I shall right now	And if ye vouche sauf, anon I shal
That is called Jerusalem celestial.	That highte Jerusalem celestial.
Of that same perfect glorious pilgrimage	Of thilke parfit glorious pilgrymage
To show you the way, in this journey,	To shewe yow the wey, in this viage,
And Jesus, for his grace, send me wit	And Jhesu, for his grace, wit me sende
To conclude all this festivity and make an end.	To knytte up al this feeste and make an ende.
I will yow tell a merry tale in prose	I wol yow telle a myrie tale in prose
And, God knows, rime I consider but little better;	Ne, God woot, rym holde I but litel bettre;
I can not recite `rum, ram, ruf,' letter by letter,	I kan nat geeste `rum, ram, ruf,' by lettre,
But trust well, I am a Southern man;	But trusteth wel, I am a Southren man;
Provide you with permissible pleasure, insofar as I can.	Do yow plesaunce leefful, as I kan.
I will very gladly, to Christ's reverence,	I wol ful fayn, at Cristes reverence,
And providing that you will give me your attention,	And thanne that ye wol yeve me audience,
Morality and virtuous subject matter,	Moralitee and vertuous mateere,
For which I say, if you want to hear	For which I seye, if that yow list to heere
When I can sow wheat, if I so wish?	Whan I may sowen whete, if that me lest?
And tell fictional tales and such wretched things.	And tellen fables and swich wrecchednesse.
Reproves them that abandon truthfulness	Repreveth hem that weyven soothfastnesse
For Paul, who writes unto Timothy,	For Paul, that writeth unto Thymothee,
"Thou gettest no fiction told by me,	"Thou getest fable noon ytoold for me,
This Parson answered, immediately,	This Persoun answerde, al atones,
Tell us a fictional tale right now, for cock's bones!"	Telle us a fable anon, for cokkes bones!"
Thou shouldest well conclude a long discourse.	Thou sholdest knytte up wel a greet mateere.
For truly, it seems to me from your appearance	For trewely, me thynketh by thy cheere
Unbuckle and show us what is in thy bag;	Unbokele and shewe us what is in thy male;
Be whatever thou may be, break thou not our rules;	Be what thou be, ne breke thou nat oure pley;
Or art thou a parson? Tell the truth, by thy faith!	Or arte a person? Sey sooth, by thy fey!
"Sire priest," said he, "art thou a vicar?	"Sire preest," quod he, "artow a vicary?
Who tells this tale to us pleasingly.	That telleth this tale to us lustily.
I pray to God, give right good luck to him,	I pray to God, so yeve hym right good chaunce,
Almost fulfilled is all my governance.	Almoost fulfild is al myn ordinaunce.
I believe that we have heard from each social class;	I trowe that we han herd of ech degree;
Fulfilled is my plan and my decree;	Fulfilled is my sentence and my decree;
Now we lack no tales more than one.	Now lakketh us no tales mo than oon.
On this occasion, our jolly company,	As in this caas, oure joly compaignye,
For which our Host, since he was accustomed to guide,	For which oure Hoost, as he was wont to gye,
As we were entering at edge of a village;	As we were entryng at a thropes ende;
I mean Libra -- steadily ascended	I meene Libra -- alwey gan ascende
Therewith the moon's exaltation --	Therwith the moones exaltacioun --
Into six feet equal in size.	In sixe feet equal of proporcioun.
Of such feet as if my height were divided	Of swiche feet as my lengthe parted were
My shadow was there at that same time,	My shadwe was at thilke tyme, as there
For eleven feet, or little more or less,	For ellevene foot, or litel moore or lesse,
More than nine and twenty degrees in altitude.	Degrees nyne and twenty as in highte.
So low that he was not, to my sight,	So lowe that he nas nat, to my sighte,
The sun from the meridian was descended	The sonne fro the south lyne was descended
By the time that the Manciple had his tale all ended,	By that the Maunciple hadde his tale al ended,
Here follows the Prologue of the Parson's Tale.	Heere folweth the Prologe of the Persouns Tale.
Here ends the Physician's Tale.	Heere is ended the Phisiciens Tale
Abandon sin, before sin abandons you.	Forsaketh synne, er synne yow forsake.
Therefore I advise you to take this counsel:	Therfore I rede yow this conseil take:
He knows not how soon he shall be terrified.	He noot how soone that he shal been afered.
That no man knows about it but God and he.	That no man woot therof but God and he.
Because of a wicked life, though it so secret be	Of wikked lyf, though it so pryvee be
The worm of conscience may tremble for fear	The worm of conscience may agryse
In any rank, nor in what sort of way;	In no degree, ne in which manere wyse;
Beware, for no man knows whom God will smite	Beth war, for no man woot whom God wol smyte
Here may men see how sin has its reward.	Heere may men seen how synne hath his merite.
Who were accessories to this crime.	That were consentant of this cursednesse.
The remnant were hanged, high ranking and low,	The remenant were anhanged, moore and lesse,
And also, certainly, he had been tricked (by Apius).	And elles, certes, he had been bigyled.
Except that Virginius, of his pity,	But that Virginius, of his pitee,
Was condemned to hang upon a tree,	Was demed for to hange upon a tree,
Who was servant unto this Apius,	That servant was unto this Apius,
Where he slew himself; and Claudius,	Ther as he slow hymself; and Claudius,
And cast him in a prison straightway,	And caste hym in a prisoun right anon,
For which unto this Apius they go	For which unto this Apius they gon
They knew well that he was lecherous.	They wisten wel that he was lecherus.
That it was by the conspiring of Apius;	That it was by the assent of Apius;
Because of the manner of the churl's claim,	By manere of the cherles chalangyng,
For the false wickedness was known.	For knowen was the false iniquitee.
To save the knight, for compassion and for pity,	To save the knyght, for routhe and for pitee,
But right away a thousand people burst in,	But right anon a thousand peple in thraste,
He ordered [his men] to take him and hang him at once;	He bad to take hym and anhange hym faste;
And when the judge saw it, as says the story,	And whan the juge it saugh, as seith the storie,
As he sat yet rendering judgements in court.	As he sat yet in doom in consistorie.
And he did present it to the judge,	And to the juge he gan it to presente,
Struck off her head, and by the hair siezed it,	Hir heed of smoot, and by the top it hente,
Her father, with very sorrowful heart and will,	Hir fader, with ful sorweful herte and wil,
That with his sword he would smite gently;	That with his swerd he wolde smyte softe;
And with that word she prayed him repeatedly	And with that word she preyed hym ful ofte
Do with your child your will, in God's name!"	Dooth with youre child youre wyl, a Goddes name!"
Give me my death, before I have dishonor;	Yif me my deeth, er that I have a shame;
"Blessed be God that I shall die a maid!	"Blissed be God that I shal dye a mayde!
She rises up, and to her father said,	She riseth up, and to hir fader sayde,
And afterwards, when her swooning is gone,	And after, whan hir swownyng is agon,
And with that word immediately she fell in a swoon,	And with that word she fil aswowne anon,
To welcome him with great solemnity."	To welcome hym with greet solempnitee."
And, God knows it, her trespass was nothing,	And, God it woot, no thyng was hir trespas,
To lament, before he slew her, alas!	For to compleyne, er he hir slow, allas!
For, truly, Jeptha gave his daughter grace	For, pardee, Jepte yaf his doghter grace
"To lament my death for a little while;	"My deeth for to compleyne a litel space;
"Then give me time, father mine," said she,	"Thanne yif me leyser, fader myn," quod she,
"No, certainly, dear daughter mine," said he.	"No, certes, deere doghter myn," quod he.
Is there no grace, is there no remedy?"	Is ther no grace, is ther no remedye?"
And said, "Good father, must I dye?	And seyde, "Goode fader, shal I dye?
The tears burst out of her two eyes,	The teeris bruste out of hir eyen two,
And with that word she both her arms laid	And with that word she bothe hir armes layde
"O mercy, dear father!" said this maid,	"O mercy, deere fader!" quod this mayde,
Have heard; there is no need to tell it again.	Han herd; nat nedeth for to telle it moore.
And told her the whole business, as you before	And tolde hire al the cas, as ye bifore
For that reason he has falsely judged thee to-day" --	Thus hath he falsly jugged the to-day" --
Alas, that ever Apius saw thee!	Allas, that evere Apius the say!
My piteous hand must smite off thy head.	My pitous hand moot smyten of thyn heed.
For love, and not for hate, thou must be dead;	For love, and nat for hate, thou most be deed;
Take thou thy death, for this is my decision.	Take thou thy deeth, for this is my sentence.
And in my life my greatest joy also,	And in my lyf my laste joye also,
O daughter, who art my greatest woe,	O doghter, which that art my laste wo,
That thou were never out of my thoughts!	That thou were nevere out of my remembraunce!
Whom I have nurured with such pleasure	Which I have fostred up with swich plesaunce
O dear daughter, ender of my life,	O deere doghter, endere of my lyf,
To die by a sword or by a knife.	To dyen with a swerd or with a knyf.
For never thou deservedest for whatever reason	For nevere thou deservedest wherfore
That thou most suffer; alas, that I was born!	That thou most suffre; allas, that I was bore!
There are two ways, either death or shame,	Ther been two weyes, outher deeth or shame,
Although he would not deviate from his purpose.	Al wolde he from his purpos nat converte.
With a father's pity stabbing through his heart,	With fadres pitee stikynge thurgh his herte,
Upon her humble face he did behold,	Upon hir humble face he gan biholde,
And with a face as dead as cold ashes	And with a face deed as asshen colde
And immediately had his dear daughter called,	And leet anon his deere doghter calle,
He goes home, and sat himself in his hall,	He gooth hym hoom, and sette him in his halle,
Unto the judge, to live in lechery,	Unto the juge, in lecherie to lyven,
By force had to give his dear daughter	Moste by force his deere doghter yiven
Because of the verdict of this justice Apius	Thurgh sentence of this justice Apius
The churl shall have his slave, this I decree."	The cherl shal have his thral, this I awarde."
Go bring her forth, and put her in our guardianship.	Go bryng hire forth, and put hire in oure warde.
Thou shalt no longer keep her in thine house.	Thou shalt no lenger in thyn hous hir save.
"I decide that this churl should have his slave right now;	"I deeme anon this cherl his servant have;
But gave his judgment, and said thus:	But yaf his juggement, and seyde thus:
Nor hear one word more from Virginius,	Ne heere a word moore of Virginius,
This cursed judge would not at all delay,	This cursed juge wolde no thyng tarie,
That all that his adversary said was false,	That al was fals that seyde his adversarie,
And also by the evidence of many a person,	And eek by witnessyng of many a wight,
Hastily, before he finished telling his tale,	But hastily, er he his tale tolde,
Virginius began to look upon the churl,	Virginius gan upon the cherl biholde,
Lo, this was all the substance of his complaint.	Lo, this was al the sentence of his bille.
Yield me my slave, if it be your will."	Yeld me my thral, if that it be youre wille."
Therefore to you, my lord judge, I pray,	Wherfore to yow, my lord the juge, I preye,
She is not his daughter, whatever he may say.	She nys his doghter nat, what so he seye.
By evidence, lord, providing that you be not displeased.	By witnesse, lord, so that it nat yow greeve.
While she was very young; this will I prove	Whil that she was ful yong; this wol I preeve
Who was stolen from my house upon one night,	Which fro myn hous was stole upon a nyght,
Expressly against my will, holds	Holdeth, expres agayn the wyl of me,
Against the law, against all equity,	Agayns the lawe, agayn al equitee,
How a knight, called Virginius,	How that a knyght, called Virginius,
Your poor servant Claudius shows	Sheweth youre povre servant Claudius
"To you, my lord, Sir Apius so dear,	"To yow, my lord, sire Apius so deere,
The substance of it was as you shall hear:	The sentence of it was as ye shul heere:
And right away this cursed complaint was read;	And right anon was rad this cursed bille;
Virginius came to learn the judge's will,	Virginius cam to wite the juges wille,
Thou shalt have all justice, and no wrong here."	Thou shalt have al right, and no wrong heere."
I can not give definitive judgment.	I may nat yeve diffynytyf sentence.
The judge answered, "Of this, in his absence,	The juge answerde, "Of this, in his absence,
That what my formal complaint will express is truth."	That sooth is that my bille wol expresse."
I will prove it, and find good evidence,	I wol it preeve, and fynde good witnesse,
And if he will say it is not thus,	And if that he wol seyn it is nat thus,
In which I complain about Virginius;	In which I pleyne upon Virginius;
Do me justice concerning this piteous formal complaint,	As dooth me right upon this pitous bille,
And said, "Lord, if it be your will,	And seyde, "Lord, if that it be youre wille,
This false churl came forth at a very rapid pace,	This false cherl cam forth a ful greet pas,
As he was accustomed, sat in his court,	As he was wont, sat in his consistorie,
This false judge, as the story tells us,	This false juge, as telleth us the storie,
And so it happened soon after, on a certain day,	And so bifel soone after, on a day,
Hastening his delight all that he can.	To hasten his delit al that he may.
This false judge goes now fast about	This false juge gooth now faste aboute
The substance of it is true, beyond doubt),	The sentence of it sooth is, out of doute),
But known for a noteworthy historical fact;	But knowen for historial thyng notable;
(Such was his name, for this is no fable,	(So was his name, for this is no fable,
This false judge, who is called Apius,	This false juge, that highte Apius,
As you shall later hear it clearly,	As ye shul heere it after openly,
Should be accomplished very subtly,	Parfourned sholde been ful subtilly,
In great detail, how his lechery	Fro point to point, how that his lecherie
When all their conspiracy was planned	Whan shapen was al hire conspiracie
And gave him precious and expensive gifts.	And yaf hym yiftes preciouse and deere.
Glad was this judge, and made much of him (the churl),	Glad was this juge, and maked him greet cheere,
When this cursed plot was agreed upon	Whan that assented was this cursed reed,
And if he did, he should lose his head.	And if he dide, he sholde lese his heed.
He should tell it to no creature,	He sholde telle it to no creature,
This judge unto this churl his tale has told	This juge unto this cherl his tale hath toold
Whom he knew for trickery and for boldness.	Which that he knew for subtil and for boold.
He sent for a churl, who was in the town,	He sente after a cherl, was in the toun,
For which, after great deliberation,	For which, by greet deliberacioun,
And make her sin with her body.	As for to make hire with hir body synne.
That he knew well he could never win her	That wel he wiste he myghte hire nevere wynne
Was confirmed in such supreme goodness	Confermed was in swich soverayn bountee
For she had powerful friends, and also she	For she was strong of freendes, and eek she
He thought, would he be able to succeed;	Hym thoughte, he was nat able for to speede;
Could win the maiden to his purpose.	The mayden to his purpos wynne myghte.
And taught him suddenly that he by trickery	And taughte hym sodeynly that he by slyghte
Immediately. the fiend ran into his heart,	Anon the feend into his herte ran,
"This maid shall be mine, despite what any man (may do)!"	"This mayde shal be myn, for any man!"
And to himself very secretly he said,	And to hymself ful pryvely he sayde,
So was he caught by the beauty of this maid,	So was he caught with beautee of this mayde,
Immediately his heart changed and his mood,	Anon his herte chaunged and his mood,
As she passed by where this judge stood.	As she cam forby ther as this juge stood.
Upon this maid, considering her very intently,	Upon this mayde, avysynge hym ful faste,
Who was governor of that region.	That governour was of that regioun.
Now was there then a justice in that town,	Now was ther thanne a justice in that toun,
As is the manner of young maidens.	As is of yonge maydens the manere.
Toward a temple, with her mother dear,	Toward a temple, with hire mooder deere,
This maid upon a day went in the town	This mayde upon a day wente in the toun
(The Doctor [St. Augustine] makes this description.)	(The Doctour maketh this descripcioun.)
And is glad of his sorrow and his misery.	And glad is of his sorwe and his unheele.
Who is sorry of other men's prosperity	That sory is of oother mennes wele
Who loved virtue, save Envy alone,	That loved vertu, save Envye allone,
Both of her beauty and her goodness widespread,	Bothe of hir beautee and hir bountee wyde,
For which sprang out all around the fame,	For which the fame out sprong on every syde,
She was so prudent and so filled with good.	She was so prudent and so bountevous.
That is proper to a virtuous maiden,	That longeth to a mayden vertuous,
As in a book, every good word or deed	As in a book, every good word or dede
For in her manner of life maidens might read,	For in hir lyvyng maydens myghten rede,
So guarded herself she needed no governess	So kepte hirself hir neded no maistresse,
This maiden, of whom I will narrate this tale,	This mayde, of which I wol this tale expresse,
For I must turn again to my subject.	For I moot turne agayn to my matere.
The wolf has many a sheep and lamb torn to pieces.	The wolf hath many a sheep and lamb torent.
Under a soft and negligent shepherd	Under a shepherde softe and necligent
If they do, you shall dearly pay for it.	If that they doon, ye shul it deere abeye.
That they should perish; for I dare well say	That they ne perisse; for I dar wel seye
Or by your negligence in chastising,	Or by youre necligence in chastisynge,
Beware, lest by example of your (manner of) living,	Beth war, if by ensample of youre lyvynge,
While they are under your governance.	Whil that they been under youre governaunce.
Yours is the responsibility for all their supervision,	Youre is the charge of al hir surveiaunce,
If you have children, be it one or more,	Though ye han children, be it oon or mo,
Is when a person betrays innocence.	Is whan a wight bitrayseth innocence.
Of all betrayals the supreme wickedness	Of alle tresons sovereyn pestilence
And pay attention to what I shall say:	And taketh kep of that that I shal seyn:
For whoever does so, is a traitor, certainly.	For whoso dooth, a traitour is, certeyn.
Lest you be damned for your wicked intent;	Lest ye be dampned for youre wikke entente;
Take good care that you assent unto no vice,	Looke wel that ye unto no vice assente,
Now guard well, for if you want (to do it), you can.	Now kepeth wel, for if ye wole, ye kan.
Can guard a forest better than any other man.	Kan kepe a forest best of any man.
His greedy appetite and all his old craft,	His likerousnesse and al his olde craft,
Look that you do not desisit from teaching them virtue.	To teche hem vertu looke that ye ne slake.
For evermore; therefore, for Christ's sake,	For everemo; therfore, for Cristes sake,
And have fully renounced such misconduct	And han forsaken fully swich meschaunce
And know very well the tricks of the trade,	And knowen wel ynough the olde daunce,
Or else you have fallen into frailty,	Or elles ye han falle in freletee,
Either because you have kept your chastity,	Outher for ye han kept youre honestee,
Of lords' daughters only for two things:	Of lordes doghtres oonly for two thynges:
Think that you are set in charge	Thenketh that ye been set in governynges
Do not take of my words any displeasure.	Ne taketh of my wordes no displesaunce.
And you mistresses, in your old age,	And ye maistresses, in youre olde lyf,
Of boldness, when she is grown to be a wife.	Of booldnesse, whan she woxen is a wyf.
For all too soon may she learn the lore	For al to soone may she lerne loore
Which is very perilous and has been since long ago,	Which is ful perilous and hath been yoore.
Too soon ripe and bold, as anyone can see,	To soone rype and boold, as men may se,
Such things make children to be	Swich thynges maken children for to be
That provide opportunities for flirtations.	That been occasions of daliaunces.
As is at feasts, revels, and at dances,	As is at feestes, revels, and at daunces,
Where there was likely to be talk of folly,	Where likly was to treten of folye,
She has very often pretended to be ill,	She hath ful ofte tyme syk hire feyned,
And of her own moral strength, of her own free choice,	And of hir owene vertu, unconstreyned,
As if men would cast oil or grease into a fire.	As men in fyr wol casten oille or greesse.
For wine and youth does increase (the power of) Venus,	For wyn and youthe dooth Venus encresse,
Bacchus had no mastery of her mouth at all;	Bacus hadde of hir mouth right no maistrie;
To keep herself away from idle sluggishness.	To dryve hire out of ydel slogardye.
Constant in heart, and ever diligent	Constant in herte, and evere in bisynesse
Modest she was in maidenly modesty,	Shamefast she was in maydens shamefastnesse,
In accord with virtue and nobility.	Sownynge in vertu and in gentillesse.
To seem wise, but in accordance with her rank in life	To seme wys, but after hir degree
No pretentious terms had she	No countrefeted termes hadde she
Her manner of speaking was also very womanly and plain,	Hir facound eek ful wommanly and pleyn,
Though she was wise as Pallas, I dare say,	Though she were wis as Pallas, dar I seyn,
She was always discreet in conversation;	Discreet she was in answeryng alway;
With moderation also in demeanor and dress.	With mesure eek of beryng and array.
With all temperance and patience,	With alle attemperaunce and pacience,
With all humility and abstinence,	With alle humylitee and abstinence,
For which she flourished in virginity	For which she floured in virginitee
That is to be praised by (one with) sound moral judgement.	That is to preyse, as by discrecioun.
In her there lacked no characteristic	In hire ne lakked no condicioun
A thousand times more virtuous was she.	A thousand foold moore vertuous was she.
And if her beauty was excellent,	And if that excellent was hire beautee,
Resembling the rays of his burnished sunbeams.	Lyk to the stremes of his burned heete.
And Phebus has dyed her great tresses	And Phebus dyed hath hire tresses grete
Where such colors should rightly be;	Where as by right swiche colours sholde be;
Before she was born, upon her noble limbs,	Er she were born, upon hir lymes fre,
Has she painted this noble creature,	She peynted hath this noble creature,
For just as she can paint a lily white,	For right as she kan peynte a lilie whit,
In whom Nature had such delight.	In which that Nature hadde swich delit.
This maid was twelve years of age and two,	This mayde of age twelve yeer was and tweye,
It seems to me that Nature would say thus.	Thus semeth me that Nature wolde seye.
Whatever complexion they have or whatever shapes."	What colour that they han or what figures."
So do I all my other creatures,	So do I alle myne othere creatures,
I made her to the worship of my lord;	I made hire to the worshipe of my lord;
My lord and I are fully in agreement.	My lord and I been ful of oon accord.
And nothing at all will I ask for my work;	And for my werk right no thyng wol I axe;
Right as I wish, and in my control is each thing	Right as me list, and ech thyng in my cure is
To form and paint earthly creatures	To forme and peynten erthely creaturis
Has appointed me his Chief Deputy,	Hath maked me his vicaire general,
For He who is the principal creator	For He that is the formere principal
If they presumed to imitate me.	If they presumed me to countrefete.
Either to carve, or paint, or forge, or beat,	Outher to grave, or peynte, or forge, or bete,
Apelles or Zeuxis, should work in vain	Apelles, Zanzis, sholde werche in veyn
Or carve, or paint; for I dare well say	Or grave, or peynte; for I dar wel seyn
Not Pygmalion, though he always forge and beat,	Pigmalion noght, though he ay forge and bete,
Thus can I form and paint a creature,	Thus kan I forme and peynte a creature,
As though she would say, "Lo! I, Nature,	As though she wolde seyn, "Lo! I, Nature,
Formed her in such great excellence,	Yformed hire in so greet excellence,
For Nature has with her greatest diligence	For Nature hath with sovereyn diligence
Above every person that one may see;	Aboven every wight that man may see;
Fair was this maid in excellent beauty	Fair was this mayde in excellent beautee
No more children had he in all his life.	No children hadde he mo in al his lyf.
This knight had a daughter by his wife;	This knyght a doghter hadde by his wyf;
And having powerful friends, and great wealth.	And strong of freendes, and of greet richesse.
A knight who was called Virginius,	A knyght that called was Virginius,
There was, as Titus Livius tells,	Ther was, as telleth Titus Livius,
And let me tell all my tale, I pray."	And lat me tellen al my tale, I preye."
And therefore hearken what I shall say,	And therfore herkneth what that I shal seye,
In imitation of which this merry tale I write.	After the which this murye tale I write.
From the meaning of that little treatise	Fro the sentence of this tretys lyte
You shall nowhere find difference	Shul ye nowher fynden difference
Blame not me; for, in my essential meaning,	Blameth me nat; for, as in my sentence,
As you have heard, yet to you all I pray	As ye han herd, yet to yow alle I preye
With which to strengthen the effect of my matter;	To enforce with th' effect of my mateere;
Comprehended in this little treatise here,	Comprehended in this litel tretys heere,
Of proverbs than you have heard before	Of proverbes than ye han herd bifoore
As thus, though I tell something more	As thus, though that I telle somwhat moore
If you think I vary as in my speech,	If that yow thynke I varie as in my speche,
Therefore, gentlemen, I beseech you,	Therfore, lordynges alle, I yow biseche,
But doubtless their essential meaning is all the same.	But doutelees hir sentence is al oon.
I mean of Mark, Matthew, Luke, and John --	I meene of Mark, Mathew, Luc, and John --
When they His piteous passion express --	Whan they his pitous passioun expresse --
Although there may be a difference in their telling.	Al be ther in hir tellyng difference.
And all agree in their meaning,	And alle acorden as in hire sentence,
But nonetheless their essential meaning is all true,	But nathelees hir sentence is al sooth,
Does not say everything as his fellow does;	Ne seith nat alle thyng as his felawe dooth;
Who tells us of the pain of Jesus Christ	That telleth us the peyne of Jhesu Crist
"As thus: you know that every Evangelist	"As thus: ye woot that every Evaungelist
By various folk, as I shall tell you.	Of sondry folk, as I shal yow devyse.
Although it is told sometimes in various ways	Al be it told somtyme in sondry wyse
It is a virtuous moral tale,	It is a moral tale vertuous,
That ought to please you, as I suppose,	That oghte liken yow, as I suppose,
I will you tell a little thing in prose	I wol yow telle a litel thyng in prose
"Gladly," said I, "by God's sweet pain!	"Gladly," quod I, "by Goddes sweete pyne!
In which there may be some mirth or some doctrine."	In which ther be som murthe or som doctryne."
Or tell something in prose, at the least,	Or telle in prose somwhat, at the leeste,
Let's see whether thou can tell anything in alliterative verse,	Lat se wher thou kanst tellen aught in geeste,
Sir, at one word, thou shalt no longer rime.	Sire, at o word, thou shalt no lenger ryme.
Thou dost nothing else but waste time.	Thou doost noght elles but despendest tyme.
Thy crappy riming is not worth a turd!	Thy drasty rymyng is nat worth a toord!
Since it is the best rime I know?"	Syn that it is the beste rym I kan?"
From telling more of my tale than another man,	Moore of my tale than another man,
"Why so?" said I, "why wilt thou prevent me	"Why so?" quod I, "why wiltow lette me
This may well be doggerel verse," said he.	This may wel be rym dogerel," quod he.
Now such a rime I commit to the devil!	Now swich a rym the devel I biteche!
My ears ache from thy crappy speech.	Myne eres aken of thy drasty speche.
That, as surely as God may bless my soul,	That, also wisly God my soule blesse,
So weary of thy true ignorance	So wery of thy verray lewednesse
Said our Host, "for thou makest me	Quod oure Hooste, "for thou makest me
Until on a day --	Til on a day --
So worthy in his armor,	So worly under wede,
As did the knight sir Perceval	As dide the knyght sire Percyvell
He himself drank water of the well,	Hymself drank water of the well,
On herbs fine and good.	Of herbes fyne and goode.
And by him his war-horse grazes	And by hym baiteth his dextrer
His bright helm was his pillow,	His brighte helm was his wonger,
But lie in his hood;	But liggen in his hoode;
He would not sleep in any house,	He nolde slepen in noon hous,
God protect his body from shame!	God shilde his cors fro shonde!
And in that stuck a lily flower --	And therinne stiked a lilie flour --
Upon his top of his helmet he bore a tower,	Upon his creest he bar a tour,
Like a spark out of the burning log;	As sparcle out of the bronde;
And forth upon his way he glided	And forth upon his wey he glood
His good steed he mounted	His goode steede al he bistrood,
Of royal chivalry!	Of roial chivalry!
But sir Thopas, he bears the flower	But sir Thopas, he bereth the flour
Of sir Lybeux Desconus and Pleyndamour --	Of sir Lybeux and Pleyndamour --
Of Horn child and of Ypotys,	Of Horn child and of Ypotys,
Men speak of excellent romances,	Men speken of romances of prys,
Right now I will you tell.	Anon I wol yow telle.
And of ladies' passionate love	And of ladyes love-drury
Of battle and of chivalry,	Of bataille and of chivalry,
And hearken to my tale;	And herkneth to my spelle;
Both knight and noble lady,	Bothe knyght and lady free,
Now hold your mouth, for kindness, please,	Now holde youre mouth, par charitee,
To tell it will I try	To telle it wol I fonde.
Lo, my lords, here is a fit!	Loo, lordes myne, heere is a fit!
In land.	In londe.
Very softly and easily	Ful softely and rounde
It goes at a slow walk on the way	It gooth an ambil in the way
His steed was all dapple gray,	His steede was al dappull gray,
The head ground very sharp;	The heed ful sharpe ygrounde;
That foretells war, and nothing of peace,	That bodeth werre, and nothyng pees,
His spear was of fine cypress,	His spere was of fyn ciprees,
Or like the moon light.	Or as the moone light.
His saddle was of ivory,	His sadel was of rewel boon,
His helm of bright brass;	His helm of latoun bright;
His sword's sheath of ivory,	His swerdes shethe of yvory,
His leg guards were of hardened leather,	His jambeux were of quyrboilly,
Whatever may happen!	Bityde what bityde!
How the giant shall be dead,	How that the geaunt shal be deed,
And there he swore on ale and bread	And there he swoor on ale and breed
Beside a carbuncle (red gem);	A charbocle bisyde;
And on that was a boar's head,	And therinne was a bores heed,
In which he will dispute.	In which he wol debate.
As white as is a lily flour,	As whit as is a lilye flour,
And over that his surcoat	And over that his cote-armour
Very strong it was of iron plate;	Ful strong it was of plate;
Which was all wrought with jewelers' work,	Was al ywroght of Jewes werk,
And over that a fine plate armor,	And over that a fyn hawberk,
To prevent piercing of his heart;	For percynge of his herte;
And over that a chain-mail shirt	And over that an haubergeoun
And next to his shirt a quilted jacket,	And next his sherte an aketoun,
Of linen cloth fine and clear,	Of cloth of lake fyn and cleere,
He put on next to his white flesh	He dide next his white leere
With sugar that is excellent.	With sugre that is trye.
And licorice, and also cumin,	And lycorys, and eek comyn,
Of gingerbread that was very fine,	Of gyngebreed that was ful fyn,
And royal delicacies	And roial spicerye
And mead also in a maple drinking bowl,	And mede eek in a mazelyn,
They fetched him first the sweet wine,	They fette hym first the sweete wyn,
And also of the joys of love."	And eek of love-likynge."
Of romances that are royal,	Of romances that been roiales,
Right now in my arming,	Anon in myn armynge,
And story tellers to tell tales,	And geestours for to tellen tales,
"Do come," he said, "my musicians,	"Do come," he seyde, "my mynstrales,
Of one who shone very bright.	Of oon that shoon ful brighte.
For love and pleasure	For paramour and jolitee
With a giant with three heads,	With a geaunt with hevedes three,
For by necessity he must fight	For nedes moste he fighte
To make him both amusement and delight,	To make hym bothe game and glee,
Is come again to town.	Is comen agayn to towne.
Spurring over hill and dale,	Prikyng over hill and dale,
How sir Thopas, with slender waist,	How sir Thopas, with sydes smale,
For now I will you tell	For now I wol yow rowne
Merrier than the nightingale,	Murier than the nightyngale,
Yet listen, gentlemen, to my tale	Yet listeth, lordes, to my tale
And due to his fair bearing.	And thurgh his fair berynge.
And it was all due to God's grace,	And al it was thurgh Goddes gras,
But child Thopas safely escapes,	But faire escapeth child Thopas,
This giant threw stones at him	This geant at hym stones caste
Sir Thopas drew back very fast;	Sire Thopas drow abak ful faste;
For here thou shalt be slain."	For heere thow shalt be slawe."
Ere it be fully prime of day ( a.m.),	Er it be fully pryme of day,
Shall I pierce, if I can,	Shal I percen, if I may,
Thy maw	Thy mawe
Very bitterly pay for it.	Abyen it ful sowre.
That thou shalt by means of this light lance	That thou shalt with this launcegay
And yet I trust, by my faith,	And yet I hope, par ma fay,
Tomorrow will I meet with thee,	Tomorwe wol I meete with thee,
The child said, "As I may prosper,	The child seyde, "Also moote I thee,
Dwelling in this place."	Dwellynge in this place."
With harp and pipe and hurdy-gurdy,	With harpe and pipe and symphonye,
Here is the queen of Fairyland,	Heere is the queene of Fayerye,
With mace.	With mace.
At once I will slay thy steed	Anon I sle thy steede
Unless thou spur out of my territory,	But if thou prike out of myn haunt,
He said, "Child, by Termagaunt,	He seyde, "Child, by Termagaunt,
His name was sir Olifaunt,	His name was sire Olifaunt,
Until there came a big giant,	Til that ther cam a greet geaunt,
Neither woman nor child;	Neither wyf ne childe;
Who dared ride or go on foot at him,	That to him durste ride or goon,
For in that country there was no one	For in that contree was ther noon
So wild;	So wilde;
The country of Fairy	The contree of Fairye
That he found, in a secret place,	That he foond, in a pryve woon,
Until he so long had ridden and walked	Til he so longe hath riden and goon
And spurs over stile and stone	And priketh over stile and stoon
Into his saddle he climbed at once,	Into his sadel he clamb anon,
By dale and also by hill!"	By dale and eek by downe!"
And to an elf-queen I betake nyself,	And to an elf-queene I me take
All other women I forsake,	Alle othere wommen I forsake,
In town;	In towne;
Worthy to be my mate	Worthy to be my make
For in this world no woman is	For in this world no womman is
"An elf-queen will I love, indeed,	"An elf-queene wol I love, ywis,
An elf-queen shall be my sweetheart	An elf-queene shal my lemman be
I dreamed all this night, by God,	Me dremed al this nyght, pardee,
To bind me so painfully?	To bynde me so soore?
What does this love have against me	What eyleth this love at me
"O Saint Mary, bless me!	"O Seinte Marie, benedicite!
And gave him good dry fodder.	And yaf hym good forage.
To give his steed some rest,	To make his steede som solas,
That down he laid him in that place	That doun he leyde him in that plas
So fierce was his heart,	So fiers was his corage,
Sir Thopas also so weary was	Sire Thopas eek so wery was
His sides were all blood.	His sydes were al blood.
So sweated that one could wring him;	So swatte that men myghte him wrynge;
His fair steed in his spurring	His faire steede in his prikynge
And spurred as if he were crazy.	And pryked as he were wood.
As soon as he heard the thrush sing,	Al whan he herde the thrustel synge,
Sir Thopas fell in a yearning for love,	Sire Thopas fil in love-longynge,
She sang very loud and clear.	She sang ful loude and cleere.
The wood-pigeon upon the branch	The wodedowve upon the spray
That it was joy to hear;	That joye it was to heere;
The sparrow hawk and the parrot,	The sparhauk and the papejay,
The birds sing, it can not be denied,	The briddes synge, it is no nay,
Or to lay in a clothes press.	Or for to leye in cofre.
Whether it be new or old,	Wheither it be moyste or stale,
And nutmeg to put in ale,	And notemuge to putte in ale,
And many a clove-gillyflower;	And many a clowe-gylofre;
The licorice and the zedoary,	The lycorys and the cetewale,
There spring herbs large and small,	Ther spryngen herbes grete and smale,
I tell it you, to him had almost	I telle it yow, hym hadde almest
And as he spurs north and east,	And as he priketh north and est,
Yea, both buck and hare;	Ye, bothe bukke and hare;
In which is many a wild best,	Therinne is many a wilde best,
He spurs through a fair forest,	He priketh thurgh a fair forest,
A long sword by his side.	A long swerd by his side.
And in his hand a light lance,	And in his hand a launcegay,
He mounted upon his gray steed,	He worth upon his steede gray,
Sir Thopas wanted to ride out.	Sire Thopas wolde out ride.
And it so happened upon a day,	And so bifel upon a day,
That bears the red hip.	That bereth the rede hepe.
And sweet as is the dog rose	And sweete as is the brembul flour
But he was chaste and no lecher,	But he was chaast and no lechour,
When it would be better for them to sleep;	Whan hem were bet to slepe;
They mourn for him passionately,	They moorne for hym paramour,
Very many a maid, bright in bed-chamber,	Ful many a mayde, bright in bour,
Where any ram shall stand (as a prize).	Ther any ram shal stonde.
In wrestling there was no one his peer,	Of wrastlyng was ther noon his peer,
With grey gos-hawk on hand;	With grey goshauk on honde;
And ride a-hawking for water-fowl	And ride an haukyng for river
He knew how to hunt for wild animals,	He koude hunte at wilde deer,
That cost many a half-penny.	That coste many a jane.
His robe was of silk woven with gold,	His robe was of syklatoun,
Of Bruges were his brown stockings,	Of Brugges were his hosen broun,
His shoes of Cordovan leather.	His shoon of cordewane.
That to his girdle reached down;	That to his girdel raughte adoun;
His hair, his beard was like saffron,	His heer, his berd was lyk saffroun,
And I tell you in true certainty	And I yow telle in good certayn
His complexion is like scarlet deeply dyed,	His rode is lyk scarlet in grayn,
His lips red as a rose;	His lippes rede as rose;
White was his face as fine white bread,	Whit was his face as payndemayn,
Sir Thopas grew up to be a doughty lad;	Sire Thopas wax a doghty swayn;
Since it was God's will.	As it was Goddes grace.
And he was lord of that country,	And lord he was of that contree,
His father was a very noble man,	His fader was a man ful free,
At Popering, in that place.	At Poperyng, in the place.
He was born in a distant land,	Yborn he was in fer contree,
His name was sir Thopas.	His name was sire Thopas.
In battle and in tournament;	In bataille and in tourneyment;
All about a knight who was fair and gentle	Al of a knyght was fair and gent
Of mirth and of pleasure,	Of myrthe and of solas,
And I will tell truly	And I wol telle verrayment
Listen, my lords, with good will,	Listeth, lordes, in good entent,
Here begins Chaucer's Tale of Thopas.	Heere bigynneth Chaucers Tale of Thopas.
Some dainty thing, it seems to me from his appearance."	Som deyntee thyng, me thynketh by his cheere."
Except for a riming romance I learned long ago."	But of a rym I lerned longe agoon."
For certainly I know no other tale,	For oother tale certes kan I noon,
"Host," said I, "be not displeased,	"Hooste," quod I, "ne beth nat yvele apayd,
Tell us a tale of mirth, and that right now."	Telle us a tale of myrthe, and that anon."
"Say something now, since other folk have spoken;	"Sey now somwhat, syn oother folk han sayd;
For unto no person is he sociable:	For unto no wight dooth he daliaunce.
He seems otherworldly in his behavior,	He semeth elvyssh by his contenaunce,
For any woman, small and fair of face.	For any womman, small and fair of face.
This would be a little doll in an arm to embrace	This were a popet in an arm t' enbrace
Now make way, sirs, and let this man have room!	Now war yow, sires, and lat this man have place!
" Approach nearer, and look up merrily.	"Approche neer, and looke up murily.
For ever upon the ground I see thee stare.	For evere upon the ground I se thee stare.
"Thou lookest as if thou would track a hare,	"Thou lookest as thou woldest fynde an hare,
And said thus: "What sort of man art thou?" said he;	And seyde thus: "What man artow?" quod he;
And then for the first time he looked at me,	And thanne at erst he looked upon me,
Until our Host then began to joke	Til that oure Hooste japen tho bigan,
Was so sober that it was wonderful to see,	As sobre was that wonder was to se,
When all this miracle was told, every man	Whan seyd was al this miracle, every man
And after that he, with a very merry manner,	And after that he, with ful merie chere,
Now, sir, may good fortune come to you for your tale!"	Now, sire, faire falle yow for youre tale!"
With red dye nor with grain of Portugal.	With brasile ne with greyn of Portyngale.
He needs not paint his complexion	Him nedeth nat his colour for to dyen
He looks like a sparrow-hauk with his eyes;	He loketh as a sperhauk with his yen;
So big a neck, and such a large chest!	So gret a nekke, and swich a large breest!
See, what muscles has this gentle priest,	See, whiche braunes hath this gentil preest,
Yea, more than seven times seventeen.	Ya, moo than seven tymes seventene.
Thou would have need of hens, as I think,	Thee were nede of hennes, as I wene,
Thou would be an excellent copulator of fouls (rooster).	Thou woldest ben a trede-foul aright.
But by my troth, if thou were a layman,	But by my trouthe, if thou were seculer,
This was a merry tale of Chanticleer.	This was a murie tale of Chauntecleer.
"Blessed be thy buttocks, and every testicle!	"I-blessed be thy breche, and every stoon!
"Sir Nun's Priest," our Host said straightway,	"Sire Nonnes Preest," oure Hooste seide anoon,
And bring us to his high bliss! Amen.	And brynge us to his heighe blisse! Amen.
As says my lord, make us all good men,	As seith my lord, so make us alle goode men,
Now, good God, if it be thy will,	Now, goode God, if that it be thy wille,
Take the fruit, and let the chaff be still.	Taketh the fruyt, and lat the chaf be stille.
For Saint Paul says that all that is written,	For Seint Paul seith that al that writen is,
Take the morality, good men.	Taketh the moralite, goode men.
As of a fox, or of a cock and hen,	As of a fox, or of a cok and hen,
But you who hold this tale a folly,	But ye that holden this tale a folye,
And negligent, and trust on flattery.	And necligent, and truste on flaterye.
Lo, such it is to be careless	Lo, swich it is for to be recchelees
That he chatters when he should hold his peace."	That jangleth whan he sholde holde his pees."
Who is so indiscreet of governance	That is so undiscreet of governaunce
"Nay," said the fox, "but God give him misfortune,	"Nay," quod the fox, "but God yeve hym meschaunce,
For he that closes his eyes, when he should see,	For he that wynketh, whan he sholde see,
Make me sing and close my eyes;	Do me to synge and wynke with myn ye;
Thou shalt no more through thy flattery	Thou shalt namoore thurgh thy flaterye
If thou trick me more often than once.	If thou bigyle me ofter than ones.
And first I curse myself, both blood and bones,	And first I shrewe myself, bothe blood and bones,
"Nay then," said he, "I curse both of us two.	"Nay thanne," quod he, "I shrewe us bothe two.
I shall say the truth to you, as God may help me!"	I shal seye sooth to yow, God help me so!"
Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant;	Com doun, and I shal telle yow what I mente;
But, sir, I did it with no wicked intention.	But, sire, I dide it in no wikke entente.
In as much as I made you afraid	In as muche as I maked yow aferd
I have to you," said he, "done offense,	I have to yow," quod he, "ydoon trespas,
"Alas!" said he, "O Chauntecleer, alas!	"Allas!" quod he, "O Chauntecleer, allas!
And when the fox saw that the cock was gone,	And whan the fox saugh that the cok was gon,
And high upon a tree he quickly flew.	And heighe upon a tree he fleigh anon.
This cock nimbly broke from his mouth,	This cok brak from his mouth delyverly,
And as he spoke that word, all suddenly	And as he spak that word, al sodeynly
The fox answered, "In faith, it shall be done."	The fox answerde, "In feith, it shal be don."
I will eat him, in faith, and that right away!'"	I wol hym ete, in feith, and that anon!'"
Now I am come unto the wood's side;	Now I am come unto the wodes syde;
May a true pestilence fall upon you!	A verray pestilence upon yow falle!
`Turn again, all you proud churls!	`Turneth agayn, ye proude cherles alle!
Yet should I say, as God may help me,	Yet sholde I seyn, as wys God helpe me,
And said, "Sir, if I were you,	And seyde, "Sire, if that I were as ye,
In all his dread unto the fox he spoke,	In al his drede unto the fox he spak,
This cock, that lay upon the fox's back,	This cok, that lay upon the foxes bak,
The hope and pride also of her enemy!	The hope and pryde eek of hir enemy!
Lo, how Fortune turns suddenly	Lo, how Fortune turneth sodeynly
It seemed as if heaven should fall.	It semed as that hevene sholde falle.
And with that they shrieked and they whooped.	And therwithal they skriked and they howped.
Of horn, of bone, in which they blew and puffed,	Of horn, of boon, in whiche they blewe and powped,
They brought trumpets of brass, and of box-wood,	Of bras they broghten bemes, and of box,
As that same day was made upon the fox.	As thilke day was maad upon the fox.
When they would any Fleming kill,	Whan that they wolden any Flemyng kille,
Never made shouts half so shrill	Ne made nevere shoutes half so shrille
Certainly, he Jack Straw and his company	Certes, he Jakke Straw and his meynee
So hideous was the noise -- a, bless me! --	So hydous was the noyse -- a, benedicitee! --
The geese for fear flew over the trees;	The gees for feere flowen over the trees;
The ducks cried as if men would them kill;	The dokes cryden as men wolde hem quelle;
They yelled as fiends do in hell;	They yolleden as feendes doon in helle;
They ran so hard that they thought their hearts would break.	They ronne so hem thoughte hir herte breeke.
And shouting of the men and women also	And shoutyng of the men and wommen eeke
So frightened for the barking of the dogs	So fered for the berkyng of the dogges
Ran cow and calf, and also the very hogs,	Ran cow and calf, and eek the verray hogges,
And Malkyn, with a distaff in her hand;	And Malkyn, with a dystaf in hir hand;
Ran Colle our dog, and Talbot and Gerland,	Ran Colle oure dogge, and Talbot and Gerland,
Ha, ha! The fox!" and after him they ran,	Ha, ha! The fox!" and after hym they ran,
And cried, "Help! Help and alas!	And cryden, "Out! Harrow and weylaway!
And carried the cock away upon his back,	And bar upon his bak the cok away,
And see the fox go toward the grove,	And syen the fox toward the grove gon,
And out at doors they rush anon,	And out at dores stirten they anon,
Heard these hens cry and make woe,	Herden thise hennes crie and maken wo,
This poor widow and also her two daughters	This sely wydwe and eek hir doghtres two
Now will I turn to my tale again.	Now wole I turne to my tale agayn.
Without guilt this Nero has them slain.	Withouten gilt this Nero hath hem slayn.
Of Rome senators' wives cried	Of Rome cryden senatoures wyves
As when Nero burned the city	As whan that Nero brende the citee
O woeful hens, exactly so you cried	O woful hennes, right so criden ye
And burned herself with a steadfast heart.	And brende hirselven with a stedefast herte.
That willfully into the fire she leaped	That wilfully into the fyr she sterte
She was so full of torment and of rage	She was so ful of torment and of rage
And the Romans had burned Carthage.	And that the Romayns hadde brend Cartage.
When her husband had lost his life	Whan that hir housbonde hadde lost his lyf
Much louder than did Hasdrubales' wife,	Ful louder than dide Hasdrubales wyf,
When they had seen the sight of Chauntecleer.	Whan they had seyn of Chauntecleer the sighte.
As all the hens made in the yard,	As maden alle the hennes in the clos,
And slain him, as the Aeneid tells us,	And slayn hym, as seith us Eneydos,
When he had seized king Priam by the beard,	Whan he hadde hent kyng Priam by the berd,
Was won, and Pirrus with his drawn sword,	Was wonne, and Pirrus with his streite swerd,
Was never made by ladies when Ilion (Troy)	Was nevere of ladyes maad whan Ylion
Certainly, such cry nor lamentation	Certes, swich cry nelamentation
For Chanticleer's dread and for his pain.	For Chauntecleres drede and for his peyne.
Then would I show you how that I could complain	Thanne wolde I shewe yow how that I koude pleyne
To chide the Friday, as you did?	The Friday for to chide, as diden ye?
Why had I not now thy wisdom and thy learning,	Why ne hadde I now thy sentence and thy loore,
By shot of an arrow, complained his death so grievously,	With shot, compleynedest his deeth so soore,
Who when thy worthy king Richard was slain	That whan thy worthy kyng Richard was slayn
O Gaufred, dear supreme master,	O Gaufred, deere maister soverayn,
Why wouldest thou allow him to die on thy day?	Why woldestow suffre hym on thy day to dye?
More for delight than to people the world,	Moore for delit than world to multiplye,
And in thy service did all his power,	And in thy servyce dide al his poweer,
Since this Chauntecleer was thy servant,	Syn that thy servant was this Chauntecleer,
And on a Friday befell all this misfortune.	And on a Friday fil al this meschaunce.
Alas, his wife took no heed of dreams!	Allas, his wyf ne roghte nat of dremes!
Alas, that Chauntecleer flew from the beams!	Allas, that Chauntecleer fleigh fro the bemes!
O destiny, that may not be escaped!	O destinee, that mayst nat been eschewed!
For yet there was no one that pursued him.	For yet ne was ther no man that hym sewed.
And carried him on his back toward the woods,	And on his bak toward the wode hym beer,
And grabbed Chauntecleer by the throat,	And by the gargat hente Chauntecleer,
And dan Russell the fox leaped up at once,	And daun Russell the fox stirte up atones,
And began to crow loud for the occasion.	And gan to crowe loude for the nones.
This Chauntecleer stood high upon his toes,	This Chauntecleer stood hye upon his toos,
Beware, you lords, of their treachery.	Beth war, ye lordes, of hir trecherye.
Read Ecclesiastes about flattery;	Redeth Ecclesiaste of flaterye;
Than he who says the truth unto you.	Than he that soothfastnesse unto yow seith.
Who please you well more, by my faith,	That plesen yow wel moore, by my feith,
Is in your courts, and many a sycophant,	Is in youre courtes, and many a losengeour,
Alas, you lords, many a false flatterer	Allas, ye lordes, many a fals flatour
He was so ravished with his flattery.	So was he ravysshed with his flaterie.
As one that could not espy his treason,	As man that koude his traysoun nat espie,
Let's see; can you imitate your father?"	Lat se; konne ye youre fader countrefete?"
Now sing, sir, for Saint Charity;	Now syngeth, sire, for seinte charitee;
Of your father and of his subtlety.	Of youre fader and of his subtiltee.
Between the wisdom and discretion	Bitwixe the wisedom and discrecioun
But certainly, there is no comparison	But certeyn, ther nys no comparisoun
He made him lose his benefice.	He made hym for to lese his benefice.
Upon his leg while he was young and foolish,	Upon his leg whil he was yong and nyce,
Because a priest's son gave him a knock	For that a preestes sone yaf hym a knok
Among his verses, how there was a cock,	Among his vers, how that ther was a cok,
That might pass him in song or wisdom.	That hym in song or wisedom myghte passe.
That there was no man in any region	That ther nas no man in no regioun
And also he was of such sound judgment	And eek he was of swich discrecioun
And stretch forth his neck long and small.	And strecche forth his nekke long and smal.
And stand on his tiptoes simultaneously,	And stonden on his tiptoon therwithal,
He had to wink, so loud he would cry,	He moste wynke, so loude he wolde cryen,
He would so exert himself that with both his eyes	He wolde so peyne hym that with bothe his yen
And to make his voice the more strong,	And for to make his voys the moore strong,
Certainly, it came from the heart, all that he sang.	Certes, it was of herte, al that he song.
Except for you, I heard never man so sing	Save yow, I herde nevere man so synge
As I may well have use of my two eyes --	So moote I brouke wel myne eyen tweye --
But, insofar as men speak of singing, I will say --	But, for men speke of syngyng, I wol seye --
And certainly, sir, I would very eagerly please you.	And certes, sire, ful fayn wolde I yow plese.
Have been in my house to my great pleasure;	Han in myn hous ybeen to my greet ese;
And also your mother, of her graciousness,	And eek youre mooder, of hire gentillesse,
My lord your father -- God bless his soul! --	My lord youre fader -- God his soule blesse! --
Than had Boethius, or any that knows how to sing.	Than hadde Boece, or any that kan synge.
Therewith you have in music more feeling	Therwith ye han in musyk moore feelynge
For truly, you have as merry a voice	For trewely, ye have as myrie a stevene
Was only to hear how you sing.	Was oonly for to herkne how that ye synge.
But truly, the cause of my coming	But trewely, the cause of my comynge
I am not come to spy on your secrets,	I am nat come youre conseil for t' espye,
If I to you would do harm or villainy!	If I to yow wolde harm or vileynye!
Now, certainly, I would be worse than a fiend,	Now, certes, I were worse than a feend,
Are you afraid of me who is your friend?	Be ye affrayed of me that am youre freend?
Said, "Gentle sir, alas, where will you go?	Seyde, "Gentil sire, allas, wher wol ye gon?
He would have fled, but that the fox straightway	He wolde han fled, but that the fox anon
Though he never before had seen it with his eye.	Though he never erst hadde seyn it with his ye.
From his natural opponent, if he may see it,	Fro his contrarie, if he may it see,
For naturally a beast desires to flee	For natureelly a beest desireth flee
As one that was frightened in his heart.	As man that was affrayed in his herte.
But cried straightway, "Cock! cock!" and up he leaped	But cride anon, "Cok! cok!" and up he sterte
Not at all then did he want to crow,	Nothyng ne liste hym thanne for to crowe,
He was aware of this fox, that lay very low.	He was war of this fox, that lay ful lowe.
On a butterfly among the cabbages,	Among the wortes on a boterflye,
And so befell that, as he cast his eye	And so bifel that, as he caste his ye
(For Phisiologus says surely	(For Phisiologus seith sikerly
Sang more merrily than the mermaid in the sea	Soong murier than the mermayde in the see
In the sunshine, and Chauntecleer so noble	Agayn the sonne, and Chauntecleer so free
Lies Pertelote, and all her sisters by her,	Lith Pertelote, and alle hire sustres by,
Fair in the sand, to bathe her merrily,	Faire in the soond, to bathe hire myrily,
I know no harm of any woman divine.	I kan noon harm of no womman divyne.
These are the cock's words, and not mine;	Thise been the cokkes wordes, and nat myne;
And what they say of women you may hear.	And what they seyn of wommen ye may heere.
Read authors, where they treat of such matter,	Rede auctours, where they trete of swich mateere,
If I would blame counsel of women,	If I conseil of wommen wolde blame,
But because I know not to whom it might displease,	But for I noot to whom it myght displese,
Where he was very merry and well at ease.	Ther as he was ful myrie and wel at ese.
And made Adam to go from Paradise,	And made Adam fro Paradys to go,
Woman's counsel brought us first to woe	Wommannes conseil broghte us first to wo
Women's counsels are very often fatal;	Wommennes conseils been ful ofte colde;
That he had dreamed that dream of which I told you.	That he hadde met that dreem that I yow tolde.
To walk in the yard upon that morning	To walken in the yerd upon that morwe
Who took his counsel from his wife, with sorrow,	That tok his conseil of his wyf, with sorwe,
I will not have to do with such matter;	I wol nat han to do of swich mateere;
But by conditional necessity.	But by necessitee condicioneel.
Or if his knowledge constrains not at all	Or if his wityng streyneth never a deel
Though God knew it before I was born;	Though God forwoot it er that I was wroght;
To do that same thing, or do it not,	To do that same thyng, or do it noght,
Or else, if free choice be granted to me	Or elles, if free choys be graunted me
"Need" I call simple necessity --	"Nedely" clepe I symple necessitee --
Constrains me by need to do a thing --	Streyneth me nedely for to doon a thyng --
Whether God's worthy foreknowledge	Wheither that Goddes worthy forwityng
As can the holy doctor Augustine,	As kan the hooly doctour Augustyn,
But I can not separate the valid and invalid arguments	But I ne kan nat bulte it to the bren
And has been (disputed) by a hundred thousand men.	And hath been of an hundred thousand men.
In this matter, and great disputation,	In this mateere, and greet disputisoun,
That in the university is great disagreement	That in scole is greet altercacioun
Take witness of him that is a thoroughly competent scholar,	Witnesse on hym that any parfit clerk is,
According to the opinion of certain scholars.	After the opinioun of certein clerkis.
But what God knows beforehand must by necessity be,	But what that God forwoot moot nedes bee,
That that same day was perilous to thee;	That thilke day was perilous to thee;
That thou flew from the beams into that yard!	That thou into that yerd flaugh fro the bemes!
O Chauntecleer, cursed be that morning	O Chauntecleer, acursed be that morwe
That brought all Troy completely to sorrow!	That broghtest Troye al outrely to sorwe!
False deceiver, O Greek Synon,	False dissymulour, o Greek Synon,
O new Judas Iscariot, new Genylon,	O newe Scariot, newe Genylon,
O false murderer, lurking in thy den!	O false mordrour, lurkynge in thy den!
That in ambush lie to murder men.	That in await liggen to mordre men.
As habitually do all these homicides	As gladly doon thise homycides alle
Waiting his time on Chauntecleer to fall,	Waitynge his tyme on Chauntecleer to falle,
And in a bed of cabbages he lay quietly	And in a bed of wortes stille he lay
Was accustomed, and also his wives, to repair;	Was wont, and eek his wyves, to repaire;
Into the yard where the handsome Chauntecleer	Into the yerd ther Chauntecleer the faire
The same night through the hedges broke	The same nyght thurghout the hegges brast
By exalted imagination predestined,	By heigh ymaginacioun forncast,
That in the grove had dwelled three years,	That in the grove hadde woned yeres three,
A fox, full of sly iniquity,	A col-fox, ful of sly iniquitee,
Now will I turn again to my subject matter.	Now wol I torne agayn to my sentence.
Which women hold in very great reverence.	That wommen holde in ful greet reverence.
This story is as true, I declare,	This storie is also trewe, I undertake,
Now every wise man, let him listen to me;	Now every wys man, lat him herkne me;
As a supremely important fact.	As for a sovereyn notabilitee.
He in a chronicle confidently could write it	He in a cronycle saufly myghte it write
And if a rhetorician could fairly compose,	And if a rethor koude faire endite,
God knows that worldly joy is soon gone;	God woot that worldly joye is soone ago;
For ever the latter end of joy is woe.	For evere the latter ende of joye is wo.
But suddenly to him befell a sorrowful situation,	But sodeynly hym fil a sorweful cas,
My heart is full of revel and pleasure!"	Ful is myn herte of revel and solas!"
Listen to these blissful birds, how they sing,	Herkneth thise blisful briddes how they synge,
Madame Pertelote, my world's bliss,	Madame Pertelote, my worldes blis,
Forty degrees and one, and more indeed.	Fourty degrees and oon, and moore ywis.
"The sun," he said, "has climbed up on heaven	"The sonne," he seyde, "is clomben up on hevene
That it was prime, and crowed with blissful voice.	That it was pryme, and crew with blisful stevene.
And knew by nature, and by none other knowledge,	And knew by kynde, and by noon oother loore,
Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more,	Twenty degrees and oon, and somwhat moore,
That in the sign of Taurus had run	That in the signe of Taurus hadde yronne
Cast up his eyes to the bright sun,	Caste up his eyen to the brighte sonne,
Befell that Chauntecleer in all his pride,	Bifel that Chauntecleer in al his pryde,
Since March had gone, thirty days and two,	Syn March [was gon], thritty dayes and two,
Was complete, and passed were also,	Was compleet, and passed were also,
Which is called March, when God first made man,	That highte March, whan God first maked man,
When the month in which the world began,	Whan that the month in which the world bigan,
And after I will tell his adventure.	And after wol I telle his aventure.
Leave I this Chauntecleer in his feeding place,	Leve I this Chauntecleer in his pasture,
Thus royal, as a prince is in his hall,	Thus roial, as a prince is in his halle,
And then his wives all run to him.	And to hym rennen thanne his wyves alle.
He deigned not to set his foot to ground.	Hym deigned nat to sette his foot to grounde.
And on his toes he roams up and down;	And on his toos he rometh up and doun;
He looks as if he were a grim lion,	He looketh as it were a grym leoun,
And copulated with her also as often, before it was  a.m..	And trad hire eke as ofte, er it was pryme.
He embraced Pertelote twenty times,	He fethered Pertelote twenty tyme,
Royal he was, he was no longer afraid.	Real he was, he was namoore aferd.
Because he had found a seed, which lay in the yard.	For he hadde founde a corn, lay in the yerd.
And with a cluck he began to call them,	And with a chuk he gan hem for to calle,
For it was day, and also all his hens,	For it was day, and eke his hennes alle,
That I renounce both vision and dream."	That I diffye bothe sweven and dreem."
I am so full of joy and of pleasure,	I am so ful of joye and of solas,
Because our perch is made so narrow, alas --	For that oure perche is maad so narwe, allas --
Although I can not on you ride,	Al be it that I may nat on yow ryde,
For when I feel at night your soft side --	For whan I feele a-nyght your softe syde --
`Woman is man's joy and all his bliss.'	`Womman is mannes joye and al his blis.'
Madame, the meaning of this Latin is,	Madame, the sentence of this Latyn is,
`Woman is the ruin of man --'	Mulier est hominis confusio --
For as surely as `In the beginning,	For al so siker as In principio,
You are so scarlet red about your eyes,	Ye been so scarlet reed aboute youre yen,
For when I see the beauty of your face,	For whan I se the beautee of youre face,
Of one thing God has sent me a great favor;	Of o thyng God hath sent me large grace;
Madame Pertelote, as I may have bliss,	Madame Pertelote, so have I blis,
"Now let us speak of mirth, and stop all this.	"Now let us speke of myrthe, and stynte al this.
I renounce them, I love them not at all!	I hem diffye, I love hem never a deel!
For they are poisonous, I know it well;	For they been venymes, I woot it weel;
That I put no store in laxatives,	That I ne telle of laxatyves no stoor,
Adversity; and I say furthermore	Adversitee; and I seye forthermoor
Shortly I say, as for conclusion,	Shortly I seye, as for conclusioun,
And also it is nigh day; I may not delay.	And eek it is ny day; I may nat dwelle.
But that same tale is all too long to tell,	But thilke tale is al to longe to telle,
But he was slain straightway by Achilles.	But he was slayn anon of Achilles.
He went to fight nonetheless,	He wente for to fighte natheles,
She warned him, but it might not avail;	She warned hym, but it myghte nat availle;
If that same day he went into battle.	If thilke day he wente into bataille.
How the life of Hector should be lost,	How that the lyf of Ector sholde be lorn,
She dreamed on the same night before	She dremed on the same nyght biforn
Lo here Andromacha, Hector's wife,	Lo heere Andromacha, Ectores wyf,
Which signified he should be hanged?	Which signified he sholde anhanged bee?
Dreamed he not that he sat upon a tree,	Mette he nat that he sat upon a tree,
Lo Croesus, who was king of Lydia,	Lo Cresus, which that was of Lyde kyng,
May read many a wonderful thing about dreams.	May rede of dremes many a wonder thyng.
Whoever will seek out the histories of various nations	Whoso wol seken actes of sondry remes
Whether or not they felt any effect in dreams.	Wher they ne felte noon effect in dremes.
His baker and his butler also,	His bakere and his butiller also,
Consider the king of Egypt, dan Pharaoh,	Looke of Egipte the kyng, daun Pharao,
Whether dreams are sometimes -- I say not all --	Wher dremes be somtyme -- I sey nat alle --
Read also of Joseph, and there shall you see	Reed eek of Joseph, and ther shul ye see
If he held dreams (to be) any foolishness.	If he heeld dremes any vanitee.
In the Old Testament, concerning Daniel,	In the olde testament, of Daniel,
And furthermore, I pray you, look well	And forthermoore, I pray yow, looketh wel
Warnings of things that men later see (come to pass)	Warnynge of thynges that men after seen.
Affirms (the value of) dreams, and says that they are	Affermeth dremes, and seith that they been
In Africa of the worthy Scipio,	In Affrike of the worthy Cipioun,
Macrobius, that wrote the vision	Macrobeus, that writ the avisioun
That you had read his legend, as have I.	That ye hadde rad his legende, as have I.
By God! I had rather than my shirt (give my shirt)	By God! I hadde levere than my sherte
In any dream, so holy was his heart.	Of any dreem, so hooly was his herte.
And therefore he put little store	And therfore litel tale hath he toold
From treason; but he was only seven years old,	For traisoun; but he nas but seven yeer oold,
His dream, and ordered him to guard himself well	His sweven, and bad hym for to kepe hym weel
His nurse completely explained to him	His norice hym expowned every deel
He saw his murder in his vision.	His mordre in his avysioun he say.
A little before he was murdered, on a day,	A lite er he was mordred, on a day,
That was son of Kenulphus, the noble king	That was Kenulphus sone, the noble kyng
"Lo, I read in the life of Saint Kenelm,	"Lo, in the lyf of Seint Kenelm I rede,
That many a dream is very greatly to be feared.	That many a dreem ful soore is for to drede.
Of dreams; for I say to thee, doubtless,	Of dremes; for I seye thee, doutelees,
That no man should be too heedless	That no man sholde been to recchelees
By such old examples thou may learn	By swiche ensamples olde maistow leere
And therefore, faire Pertelote so dear,	And therfore, faire Pertelote so deere,
That with them sailed on the same tide.	That with hem seyled at the same tyde.
In sight of other ships beside it,	In sighte of othere shippes it bisyde,
But by chance the ship's bottom broke open,	But casuelly the shippes botme rente,
I know not why, nor what mischance harmed it,	Noot I nat why, ne what myschaunce it eyled,
But before he had sailed half his course,	But er that he hadde half his cours yseyled,
And thus he took his leave, and went his way.	And thus he took his leve, and wente his way.
God knows, it makes me sorry; and have good day!'	God woot, it reweth me; and have good day!'
And thus willfully waste thy tide,	And thus forslewthen wilfully thy tyde,
But since I see that thou will remain here,	But sith I see that thou wolt heere abyde,
Men dream of a thing that never was nor shall be.	Men dreme of thyng that nevere was ne shal.
And of many a source of amazement indeed;	And of many a maze therwithal;
For dreams are but fantasies and foolishness.	For swevenes been but vanytees and japes.
I set not a straw by (put no value on) thy dreams,	I sette nat a straw by thy dremynges,
That I will desist from doing my tasks.	That I wol lette for to do my thynges.
`No dream,' said he, `may so frighten my heart	`No dreem,' quod he, `may so myn herte agaste
Began to laugh, and vigorously scorned him.	Gan for to laughe, and scorned him ful faste.
His fellow, that lay by his bed's side,	His felawe, that lay by his beddes syde,
For that day, he prayed him to wait.	As for that day, he preyde hym to byde.
And prayed him to delay his voyage;	And preyde hym his viage for to lette;
He woke, and told his fellow what he dreamed,	He wook, and tolde his felawe what he mette,
And said to him thus: `If thou travel tomorrow,	And seyde hym thus: `If thou tomorwe wende,
And commanded him that he should stay,	And hym comanded that he sholde abyde,
He thought a man stood by his bed's side,	Hym thoughte a man stood by his beddes syde,
He dreamed a wondrous dream before the day.	Hym mette a wonder dreem agayn the day.
The one of them, in sleeping as he lay,	That oon of hem, in slepyng as he lay,
But listen! To that one man befell a great marvel:	But herkneth! To that o man fil a greet mervaille:
And they planned to sail very early.	And casten hem ful erly for to saille.
Jolly and glad they went unto their rest,	Jolif and glad they wente unto hir reste,
The wind began to change, and blew exactly as they desired.	The wynd gan chaunge, and blew right as hem leste.
That stood very merrily upon an haven-side;	That stood ful myrie upon an haven-syde;
That made them to tarry in a city	That made hem in a citee for to tarie
If that the wind had not been contrary,	If that the wynd ne hadde been contrarie,
For a certain reason, into a far country,	For certeyn cause, into a fer contree,
Two men that would have passed over see,	Two men that wolde han passed over see,
I do not lie, as I may have joy or bliss --	I gabbe nat, so have I joye or blis --
Right in the next chapter after this --	Right in the nexte chapitre after this --
And certainly in the same book I read,	And certes in the same book I rede,
"Here men may seen that dreams are to be feared.	"Heere may men seen that dremes been to drede.
That they straightway acknowledged their wickedness,	That they biknewe hire wikkednesse anon,
And also the hosteller so grievously tortured,	And eek the hostiler so soore engyned,
Have seized the carter and so painfully tortured him,	Han hent the carter and so soore hym pyned,
And immediately, officials of that town	And right anon, ministres of that toun
Murder will out, this is my conclusion.	Mordre wol out, this my conclusioun.
Though it may wait a year, or two, or three.	Though it abyde a yeer, or two, or thre.
That He will not suffer it to be hidden,	That he ne wol nat suffre it heled be,
To God, who is so just and reasonable,	To God, that is so just and resonable,
Murder is so disgusting and abominable	Mordre is so wlatsom and abhomynable
Lo, how thou always reveal murder!	Lo, how that thou biwreyest mordre alway!
"O blissful God, that art so just and true,	"O blisful God, that art so just and trewe,
The dead man, who was just recently murdered.	The dede man, that mordred was al newe.
And in the middle of the dung they found	And in the myddel of the dong they founde
The people rushed out and cast the cart to ground,	The peple out sterte and caste the cart to grounde,
What should I more unto this tale say?	What sholde I moore unto this tale sayn?
Help! Alas! Here lies my fellow slain!'	Harrow! Allas! Heere lith my felawe slayn!'
`Who should guard and rule this city.	`That sholden kepe and reulen this citee.
I cry out on the officials,' said he,	I crye out on the ministres,' quod he,
`My fellow is murdered this same night,	`My felawe mordred is this same nyght,
Vengeance and justice of this felony:	Vengeance and justice of this felonye:
And with a hardy heart he began to cry for	And with an hardy herte he gan to crye
As you have heard the dead man tell.	As ye han herd the dede man devyse.
That was drawn up in that same manner	That was arrayed in that same wise
A dung-cart, which went as if it were to dung land,	A dong-carte, wente as it were to donge lond,
Unto the west gate of the town, and found	Unto the west gate of the toun, and fond
And forth he goes -- no longer would he delay --	And forth he gooth -- no lenger wolde he lette --
Remembering his dreams that he dreamed,	Remembrynge on his dremes that he mette,
As soon as it was day he went out of the town.'	As soone as day he wente out of the toun.'
And said, `Sir, your fellow is gone.	And seyde, `Sire, your felawe is agon.
"The innkeeper answered him straightway,	"The hostiler answerede hym anon,
After his fellow he began to call.	After his felawe he bigan to calle.
And when he came to this oxen's stall,	And whan that he cam to this oxes stalle,
To his fellow's inn he took the way;	To his felawes in he took the way;
For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,	For on the morwe, as soone as it was day,
And trust well, his dream he found very true,	And truste wel, his dreem he foond ful trewe,
With a very piteous face, pale of hue.	With a ful pitous face, pale of hewe.
My gold caused my murder, to say the truth,'	My gold caused my mordre, sooth to sayn,'
Have that same cart immediately seized.	Do thilke carte arresten boldely.
In which my body is hid very secretly;	In which my body is hid ful prively;
`A cart full of dung there shalt thou see,	`A carte ful of dong ther shaltow se,
And at the west gate of the town,' he said,	And at the west gate of the toun,' quod he,
Arise up early in the morning time,	Arys up erly in the morwe tyde,
Behold my bloody wounds deep and wide!	Bihoold my bloody woundes depe and wyde!
Came, as it seemed to him, and said, `I am now slain.	Cam, as hym thoughte, and seide, `I am now slawe.
And at third time yet his fellow	And atte thridde tyme yet his felawe
He thought his dream was nothing but a fantasy.	Hym thoughte his dreem nas but a vanitee.
He turned himself and took no heed of this.	He turned hym and took of this no keep.
But when he was wakened of his sleep,	But whan that he was wakened of his sleep,
This man out of his sleep for fear awakened suddenly;	This man out of his sleep for feere abrayde;
In all haste come to me!' he said.	In alle haste com to me!' he sayde.
Now help me, dear brother, or I die.	Now help me, deere brother, or I dye.
This night I shall be murdered where I lie!	This nyght I shal be mordred ther I lye!
And said, `Alas, for in an oxen's stall	And seyde, `Allas, for in an oxes stalle
How his fellow began to call upon him,	How that his felawe gan upon hym calle,
"And it so befell that, long before it was day,	"And so bifel that, longe er it were day,
Which us governs all in common.	That us governeth alle as in commune.
As was his adventure or his fortune,	As was his aventure or his fortune,
That other man was lodged well enough,	That oother man was logged wel ynough,
Far in a yard, with oxen of the plough;	Fer in a yeerd, with oxen of the plough;
The one of them was lodged in a stall,	That oon of hem was logged in a stalle,
And took his lodging as it would befall.	And took his loggyng as it wolde falle.
And each of them goes to his hostelry,	And ech of hem gooth to his hostelrye,
For that night, part company;	As for that nyght, departen compaignye;
In which they both might be lodged.	In which they bothe myghte ylogged bee.
That they found not so much as one cottage	That they ne founde as muche as o cotage
Of people, and also such a scantiness of lodging,	Of peple, and eek so streit of herbergage,
Where there was such a gathering	Wher as ther was swich congregacioun
And it so happened, they came in a town	And happed so, they coomen in a toun
On pilgrimage, with a very good intention,	On pilgrimage, in a ful good entente,
Says thus: that once two fellows went	Seith thus: that whilom two felawes wente
"One of the greatest author that men read	"Oon of the gretteste auctour that men rede
The proof itself shows it in the deed.	The verray preeve sheweth it in dede.
That folk endure in this present life.	That folk enduren in this lif present.
As well of joy as of tribulations	As wel of joye as of tribulaciouns
That dreams are significations	That dremes been significaciouns
And have well found by experience	And han wel founden by experience
Who say all the reverse of this sentence,	That al the revers seyn of this sentence,
Than Cato ever was, as I may prosper,	Than evere Caton was, so moot I thee,
Of many a man of more authority	Of many a man moore of auctorite
By God, men may in old books read	By God, men may in olde bookes rede
Though he commanded (us) to dread no dreams,	Though that he bad no dremes for to drede,
But nonetheless, as touching dan Cato,	But nathelees, as touchyng daun Catoun,
"Madame," said he, "great thanks for your learning.	"Madame," quod he, "graunt mercy of youre loore.
Dread no dream; I can say you no more."	Dredeth no dreem; I kan sey yow namoore."
Be merry, husband, for your father's kin!	Be myrie, housbonde, for youre fader kyn!
Peck them up right as they grow and eat them in.	Pekke hem up right as they growe and ete hem yn.
Of ground ivy, growing in our yard, where it is pleasant;	Of herbe yve, growyng in oure yeerd, ther mery is;
Of caper-spurge, or of rhamus,	Of katapuce, or of gaitrys beryis,
Or else of hellebore, that grows there,	Or elles of ellebor, that groweth there,
Of spurge laurel, centaury, and fumitory,	Of lawriol, centaure, and fumetere,
A day or two you shall have digestives	A day or two ye shul have digestyves
Or an ague that may be your death.	Or an agu that may be youre bane.
That you shall have a fever recurring every three days,	That ye shul have a fevere terciane,
And if there be an excess, I dare well bet four pence,	And if it do, I dar wel leye a grote,
And do not find yourself with an excess of hot humors.	Ne fynde yow nat repleet of humours hoote.
Beware the sun when it is high in the sky	Ware the sonne in his ascencioun
You are dominated by the choleric humor;	Ye been ful coleryk of compleccioun;
Forget not this, for God's own love!	Foryet nat this, for Goddes owene love!
To purge you beneath and also above.	To purge yow bynethe and eek above.
And in our yard I shall find those herbs	And in oure yeerd tho herbes shal I fynde
That shall be for your health and for your benefit;	That shul been for youre hele and for youre prow;
I shall myself guide you to herbs	I shal myself to herbes techen yow
Though in this town is no apothecary,	Though in this toun is noon apothecarie,
You purge yourself; and so that you shall not delay,	Ye purge yow; and for ye shal nat tarie,
That both of choler and of melancholy	That bothe of colere and of malencolye
I counsel you the best -- I will not lie --	I conseille yow the beste -- I wol nat lye --
Upon peril of my soul and of my life,	Up peril of my soule and of my lyf,
For God's love, take some laxative.	For Goddes love, as taak som laxatyf.
Said he not thus, `Attach no importance to dreams'?	Seyde he nat thus, `Ne do no fors of dremes'?
"Lo Cato, who was so wise a man,	"Lo Catoun, which that was so wys a man,
But I will pass over as lightly as I can.	But I wol passe as lightly as I kan.
That cause many a man much woe (in) sleep;	That werken many a man sleep ful wo;
Of other humors could I tell also	Of othere humours koude I telle also
Or else black devils will take them.	Or elles blake develes wole hem take.
For fear of black bears, or black bulls,	For feere of blake beres, or boles blake,
Causes very many a man in sleep to cry	Causeth ful many a man in sleep to crie
Right as the humor of melancholy	Right as the humour of malencolie
Of red beasts, (fearing) that they will bite them,	Of rede beestes, that they wol hem byte,
Of arrows, and of fire with red flames,	Of arwes, and of fyr with rede lemes,
Which causes folk in their dreams to be afraid	Which causeth folk to dreden in hir dremes
Of your red choleric humor, indeed,	Of youre rede colera, pardee,
Comes of the great superfluity	Cometh of the greete superfluytee
Certainly this dream, which you have dreamed to-night,	Certes this dreem, which ye han met to-nyght,
When humors are too abundant in a person.	Whan humours been to habundant in a wight.
And often by stomach vapors and by the mixture of bodily humors,	And ofte of fume and of complecciouns,
Dreams are produced by overeating,	Swevenes engendren of replecciouns,
Alas! And can you be frightened of dreams?	Allas! And konne ye been agast of swevenys?
Have you no man's heart, and have a beard?	Have ye no mannes herte, and han a berd?
That any thing might make you afraid?	That any thyng myghte make yow aferd?
How dare you say, for shame, unto your love	How dorste ye seyn, for shame, unto youre love
Nor any boaster, by that God above!	Ne noon avauntour, by that God above!
Nor him who is afraid of every weapon,	Ne hym that is agast of every tool,
And secret -- and no miser, nor no fool,	And secree -- and no nygard, ne no fool,
To have husbands hardy, wise, and generous,	To han housbondes hardy, wise, and free,
We all desire, if it might be,	We alle desiren, if it myghte bee,
I can not love a coward, by my faith!	I kan nat love a coward, by my feith!
Now have you lost my heart and all my love!	Now han ye lost myn herte and al my love!
Alas," said she, "for, by that God above,	Allas," quod she, "for, by that God above,
"Shame!" said she, "fie on you, coward!	"Avoy!" quod she, "fy on yow, hertelees!
This caused my groaning, doubtless."	This caused me my gronyng, doutelees."
Yet for fear of his look I almost die;	Yet of his look for feere almoost I deye;
His snout small, with two glowing eyes.	His snowte smal, with glowynge eyen tweye.
With black, unlike the rest of his hair;	With blak, unlyk the remenant of his heeris;
And tipped was his tail and both his ears	And tipped was his tayl and bothe his eeris
Upon my body, and would have had me dead.	Upon my body, and wolde han had me deed.
Was like a hound, and would have seized	Was lyk an hound, and wolde han maad areest
Within our yard, where I saw a beast	Withinne our yeerd, wheer as I saugh a beest
I dreamed how I roamed up and down	Me mette how that I romed up and doun
And keep my body out of foul prison!	And kepe my body out of foul prisoun!
Now God," said he, "interpret my dream correctly,	Now God," quod he, "my swevene recche aright,
Right now that yet my heart is grievously frightened.	Right now that yet myn herte is soore afright.
By God, I dreamed I was in such mischief	By God, me mette I was in swich meschief
I pray you that you take it not amiss.	I pray yow that ye take it nat agrief.
You are a true (sound) sleeper; fie, for shame!"	Ye been a verray sleper; fy, for shame!"
What ails you, to groan in this manner?	What eyleth yow, to grone in this manere?
She was aghast and said, "Dear heart,	She was agast and seyde, "Herte deere,
And when Pertelote thus heard him roar,	And whan that Pertelote thus herde hym roore,
As one that in his dream is deeply troubled.	As man that in his dreem is drecched soore.
This Chauntecleer began to groan in his throat,	This Chauntecleer gan gronen in his throte,
And next to him sat this faire Pertelote,	And next hym sat this faire Pertelote,
Sat on his perch, that was in the hall,	Sat on his perche, that was in the halle,
As Chauntecleer among all his wives	As Chauntecleer among his wyves alle
Beasts and birds could speak and sing.	Beestes and briddes koude speke and synge.
For in that same time, as I have understood,	For thilke tyme, as I have understonde,
In sweet accord, "My love has gone to the country!" --	In sweete accord, "My lief is faren in londe!" --
When the bright sun began to spring,	Whan that the brighte sonne gan to sprynge,
But such a joy it was to hear them sing,	But swich a joye was it to here hem synge,
He loved her so that well was him because of that.	He loved hire so that wel was hym therwith.
Of Chauntecleer, locked in every limb (completely);	Of Chauntecleer, loken in every lith;
That truly she has in possession the heart	That trewely she hath the herte in hoold
Since that same day that she was seven nights old	Syn thilke day that she was seven nyght oold
Courteous she was, discreet, and gracious,	Curteys she was, discreet, and debonaire,
Was called fair demoiselle Pertelote.	Was cleped faire damoysele Pertelote.
Of which the fairest colored on her throat	Of whiche the faireste hewed on hir throte
And wonderfully like him, in their colors;	And wonder lyk to hym, as of colours;
Which were his sisters and his concubines,	Whiche were his sustres and his paramours,
Seven hens to do all his pleasure,	Sevene hennes for to doon al his plesaunce,
This gentle cock had in his governance	This gentil cok hadde in his governaunce
And like the burnished gold was his color.	And lyk the burned gold was his colour.
His nails whiter than the lily flour,	His nayles whitter than the lylye flour,
His bill was black, and it shone like the jet stone;	His byle was blak, and as the jeet it shoon;
And notched with battlements as if it were a castle wall;	And batailled as it were a castel wal;
His comb was redder than the fine coral,	His coomb was redder than the fyn coral,
Then he crowed so that it could not be improved.	Thanne crew he that it myghte nat been amended.
For when degrees fifteen were ascended,	For whan degrees fiftene weren ascended,
Of the celestial equator in that same town;	Of the equynoxial in thilke toun;
By nature he knew (the hour of) each ascension	By nature he knew ech ascencioun
Than is a clock or an abbey timepiece.	Than is a clokke or an abbey orlogge.
Well more accurate was his crowing in his lodge	Wel sikerer was his crowyng in his logge
His voice was merrier than the merry organ	His voys was murier than the murie orgon
In all the land, there was not his peer in crowing.	In al the land, of crowyng nas his peer.
In which she had a cock, called Chauntecleer.	In which she hadde a cok, hight Chauntecleer.
With sticks, and a dry ditch outside it,	With stikkes, and a drye dych withoute,
She had a yard, enclosed all around	A yeerd she hadde, enclosed al aboute
For she was, as it were, a sort of dairywoman.	For she was, as it were, a maner deye.
Broiled bacon, and sometimes an egg or two,	Seynd bacoun, and somtyme an ey or tweye,
Milk and dark bread, in which she found no lack,	Milk and broun breed, in which she foond no lak,
Her board was provided mostly with white and black --	Hir bord was served moost with whit and blak --
And apoplexy harmed not her head.	N' apoplexie shente nat hir heed.
The gout not at all prevented her from dancing,	The goute lette hire nothyng for to daunce,
And exercise, and a contented heart.	And exercise, and hertes suffisaunce.
Moderate diet was all her medical treatment,	Attempree diete was al hir phisik,
Overeating never made her sick;	Repleccioun ne made hire nevere sik;
Her diet was such as her farm produced.	Hir diete was accordant to hir cote.
No dainty morsel passed through her throat;	No deyntee morsel passed thurgh hir throte;
She needed not a bit of spicy sauce.	Of poynaunt sauce hir neded never a deel.
In which she ate very many a scanty meal.	In which she eet ful many a sklendre meel.
Three cows, and also a sheep that is called Malle.	Three keen, and eek a sheep that highte Malle.
She had three large sows, and no more,	Thre large sowes hadde she, and namo,
She provided for herself and also her two daughters.	She foond hirself and eek hir doghtren two.
By husbandry of such as God sent her	By housbondrie of swich as God hire sente
For little was her possessions and her income.	For litel was hir catel and hir rente.
In patience led a very simple life,	In pacience ladde a ful symple lyf,
Since that same day that she was last a wife	Syn thilke day that she was last a wyf
This widow, of whom I tell you my tale,	This wydwe, of which I telle yow my tale,
Beside a grove, standing in a dale.	Biside a grove, stondynge in a dale.
A poor widow, somewhat advanced in age,	A povre wydwe, somdeel stape in age,
This sweet priest, this goodly man sir John.	This sweete preest, this goodly man sir John.
And thus he said unto us every one,	And thus he seyde unto us everichon,
And right away his tale he has begun,	And right anon his tale he hath attamed,
Unless I be merry, indeed I will be blamed."	But I be myrie, ywis I wol be blamed."
"Yes indeed, sir," said he, "yes indeed, Host, as I may I prosper,	"Yis, sir," quod he, "yis, Hoost, so moot I go,
See that thy heart be merry evermore."	Looke that thyn herte be murie everemo."
If he will serve thee, care not a bean.	If he wol serve thee, rekke nat a bene.
What if thy horse be both poor and lean?	What thogh thyn hors be bothe foul and lene?
Tell us such thing as may our hearts gladden.	Telle us swich thyng as may oure hertes glade.
"Come near, thou priest, come hither, thou sir John!	"Com neer, thou preest, com hyder, thou sir John!
And said unto the Nun's Priest straightway,	And seyde unto the Nonnes Preest anon,
Then spoke oure Host with rude speech and bold,	Thanne spak oure Hoost with rude speche and boold,
Now let another tell, as I have told."	Now lat another telle, as I have toold."
"Nay," said this Monk, "I have no desire to play.	"Nay," quod this Monk, "I have no lust to pleye.
Sir, say something about hunting, I you pray."	Sir, sey somwhat of huntyng, I yow preye."
If any thing shall be well told.	If any thyng shal wel reported be.
"And well I know the capacity of appreciation is in me,	"And wel I woot the substance is in me,
Where a man may have no hearers,	Whereas a man may have noon audience,
For certainly, as these clerks say,	For certeinly, as that thise clerkes seyn,
Then had your tale been told all in vain.	Thanne hadde your tale al be toold in veyn.
Although the mud had never been so deep;	Althogh the slough had never been so deep;
I should before this have fallen down because of sleepiness,	I sholde er this han fallen doun for sleep,
By heaven's King who for us all died,	By hevene kyng that for us alle dyde,
That on your bridle hang on every side,	That on youre bridel hange on every syde,
For truly, were it not for the clinking of your bells	For sikerly, nere clynkyng of youre belles
I pray yow earnestly tell us something else;	I pray yow hertely telle us somwhat elles;
For in it there is no pleasure nor amusement.	For therinne is ther no desport ne game.
Such talking is not worth a butterfly,	Swich talkyng is nat worth a boterflye,
Your tale annoys all this company.	Youre tale anoyeth al this compaignye.
"Sir Monk, no more of this, as God may you bless!	"Sire Monk, namoore of this, so God yow blesse!
As you have said, to hear of sadness.	As ye han seyd, to heere of hevynesse.
That which is done, and also it is a pain,	That that is doon, and als it is a peyne,
Is it to bewail or lament	It is for to biwaille ne compleyne
Just now you heard, and by God, no remedy	Right now ye herde, and pardee, no remedie
I know not what; and also of a tragedy	I noot nevere what; and als of a tragedie
You say the very truth; this Monk he chatters noisily.	Ye seye right sooth; this Monk he clappeth lowde.
"Yea," said our Host, "by Saint Paul's bell!	"Ye," quod oure Hooste, "by Seint Poules belle!
And of such a thing it would be good to tell."	And of swich thyng were goodly for to telle."
Such a thing is pleasing, as it seems to me,	Swich thyng is gladsom, as it thynketh me,
And there remains in prosperity.	And there abideth in prosperitee.
And climbs up and becomes fortunate,	And clymbeth up and wexeth fortunat,
As when a man has been in a poor condition,	As whan a man hath been in povre estaat,
And the contrary is joy and great comfort,	And the contrarie is joye and greet solas,
To hear of their sudden fall, alas!	To heeren of hire sodeyn fal, allas!
I say for myself, it is a great distress,	I seye for me, it is a greet disese,
Is quite enough for many people, I guess.	Is right ynough to muche folk, I gesse.
And much more; for a little sadness	And muchel moore; for litel hevynesse
What you have said is quite enough, indeed,	That ye han seyd is right ynough, ywis,
"Whoa!" said the Knight, "good sire, no more of this!	"Hoo!" quod the Knyght, "good sire, namoore of this!
The Prologue of the Nuns and Priests Tale.	The Prologue of the Nonnes Preestes Tale.
Here ends the Reeves Tale.	Heere is ended the Reves Tale.
Thus have I repaid the Miller in my tale.	Thus have I quyt the Millere in my tale.
Save al this company, high ranking and low (every one)!	Save al this compaignye, grete and smale!
A trickster shall himself be tricked.	A gylour shal hymself bigyled be.
"One who does evil should not expect good."	"Hym thar nat wene wel that yvele dooth."
And therefore this proverb is said very truly,	And therfore this proverbe is seyd ful sooth,
Lo, this is how it is when a miller is false!	Lo, swich it is a millere to be fals!
His wife is screwed, and his daughter also.	His wyf is swyved, and his doghter als.
Of Aleyn and of John, who beat him well.	Of Aleyn and of John, that bette hym weel.
And paid for the supper every bit	And payed for the soper everideel
And has lost the charge for grinding of the wheat,	And hath ylost the gryndynge of the whete,
Thus is the proud miller well beaten,	Thus is the proude millere wel ybete,
And at the mill yet they took their cake	And at the mille yet they tooke hir cake
And also their meal, and on their way they go.	And eek hire mele, and on hir wey they gon.
And dress themselves, and took their horse straightway,	And greythen hem, and tooke hir hors anon,
These clerks beat him well and let him lie,	Thise clerkes beete hym weel and lete hym lye,
So that down he goes, and cried, "Help! I die!"	That doun he gooth, and cride, "Harrow! I dye!"
And smote the miller on the bald skull,	And smoot the millere on the pyled skulle,
And intended to have hit this Aleyn squarely,	And wende han hit this Aleyn at the fulle,
And with the staff she drew ever nearer and nearer,	And with the staf she drow ay neer and neer,
She thought the clerk had worn a night cap,	She wende the clerk hadde wered a volupeer,
But she saw a white thing in her eye.	But as she saugh a whit thyng in hir ye.
But surely she did not know who was who,	But sikerly she nyste who was who,
And by that light she saw both the two of them,	And by that light she saugh hem bothe two,
For at a hole in shone the moon bright,	For at an hole in shoon the moone bright,
And saw a little glimmering of a light,	And saugh a litel shymeryng of a light,
And by the wall a staff she found right away,	And by the wal a staf she foond anon,
And knew the interior of the house better than did this John,	And knew the estres bet than dide this John,
To find a staff; and she leaped up also,	To fynde a staf; and she stirte up also,
And grasps by the walls to and fro,	And graspeth by the walles to and fro,
Help, Symkyn, for the false clerks fight!"	Help, Symkyn, for the false clerkes fighte!"
There lies one upon my belly and one on my head.	Ther lyth oon upon my wombe and on myn heed.
My heart is broken; help! I am as good as dead!	Myn herte is broken; help! I nam but deed!
Awake, Symond! The fiend has fallen on me.	Awak, Symond! The feend is on me falle.
"In your hands! Lord, to Thee I call!	"In manus tuas! Lord, to thee I calle!
"Help! holy cross of Bromeholm," she said,	"Help! hooly croys of Bromeholm," she seyde,
And with the fall out of her sleep she started up.	And with the fal out of hir sleep she breyde.
With John the clerk, who had been awake all night,	With John the clerk, that waked hadde al nyght,
For she was fallen asleep a little bit	For she was falle aslepe a lite wight
And down he fell backward upon his wife,	And doun he fil bakward upon his wyf,
Until the miller stumbled on a stone,	Til that the millere sporned at a stoon,
And up they go, and down again straightway,	And up they goon, and doun agayn anon,
They wallow as do two pigs in a bag;	They walwe as doon two pigges in a poke;
And on the floor, with nose and mouth badly broken,	And in the floor, with nose and mouth tobroke,
Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast;	Doun ran the blody streem upon his brest;
And on the nose he smote him with his fist.	And on the nose he smoot hym with his fest.
And he seized him angrily in turn,	And he hente hym despitously agayn,
And by the Adam's apple he caught Alayn,	And by the throte-bolle he caughte Alayn,
Who dared be so bold to degrade	Who dorste be so boold to disparage
"Thou shalt be dead, by God's worthiness!	"Thow shalt be deed, by Goddes dignitee!
Ah, false traitor! False clerk!" said he,	A, false traitour! False clerk!" quod he,
"Yes, false scoundrel," said the miller, "hast (thou done so)?	"Ye, false harlot," quod the millere, "hast?
While thou hast, like a coward, been terrified."	Whil thow hast, as a coward, been agast."
Screwed the miller's daughter flat on her back,	Swyved the milleres doghter bolt upright,
I have three times in this short night	As I have thries in this shorte nyght
For by that lord that is called Saint James,	For by that lord that called is Seint Jame,
For Christ's soul, and hear a real joke.	For Cristes saule, and heer a noble game.
And caught him by the neck, and quietly he spoke.	And caughte hym by the nekke, and softe he spak.
And in by the miller he crept right then,	And by the millere in he creep anon,
He expected to have crept in by his fellow John,	He wende have cropen by his felawe John,
Unto the bed where the miller lay.	Unto the bed ther as the millere lay.
And forth he goes, in the name of twenty devils,	And forth he goth, a twenty devel way,
Here lies the miller and his wife also."	Heere lith the millere and his wyf also."
I know well by the cradle I have gone wrong;	I woot wel by the cradel I have mysgo;
That makes me go not right.	That makes me that I ga nat aright.
My head is dizzy from my work to-night,	Myn heed is toty of my swynk to-nyght,
And found the cradle with his hand right away.	And fond the cradel with his hand anon.
I will go creep in by my fellow,"	I wol go crepen in by my felawe,"
Aleyn up rises, and thought, "Before it dawns,	Aleyn up rist, and thoughte, "Er that it dawe,
And with that word she almost began to weep.	And with that word almoost she gan to wepe.
And, good sweetheart, God save and keep thee!"	And, goode lemman, God thee save and kepe!"
Which I helped my father to steal.	Which that I heelp my sire for to stele.
That was made of thine own meal,	That was ymaked of thyn owene mele,
Thou shalt find a cake of half a bushel	Thou shalt a cake of half a busshel fynde
Right at the entry behind the door	Right at the entree of the dore bihynde
But before thou go, one thing I will tell thee:	But er thow go, o thyng I wol thee telle:
"Now, dear sweetheart," said she, "go, farewell!	"Now, deere lemman," quod she, "go, far weel!
I am thine own clerk, as I may prosper!"	I is thyn awen clerk, swa have I seel!"
But evermore, wherever I walk or ride,	But everemo, wher so I go or ryde,
The day is come; I may no longer remain here;	The day is come; I may no lenger byde;
And said, "Farewell, Malyne, sweet creature!	And seyde, "Fare weel, Malyne, sweete wight!
For he had labored all the long night,	For he had swonken al the longe nyght,
Aleyn grew weary at the time of dawn,	Aleyn wax wery in the dawenynge,
Until the third cock began to sing (an hour before dawn).	Til that the thridde cok bigan to synge.
He stabs hard and deep as if he were mad.	He priketh harde and depe as he were mad.
She had not had so merry an experience for a long time;	So myrie a fit ne hadde she nat ful yoore;
And on this good wife he lays on vigorously.	And on this goode wyf he leith on soore.
Within a moment this John the clerk leaped up,	Withinne a while this John the clerk up leep,
And lies full still, and would have gone to sleep.	And lith ful stille, and wolde han caught a sleep.
But gently she crept in to the clerk,	But faire and wel she creep in to the clerk,
And did not know where she was, for it was dark;	And nyste wher she was, for it was derk;
Because the cradle by it stood,	By cause that the cradel by it stood,
And found the bed, and thought all was well,	And foond the bed, and thoghte noght but good,
And forth she goes until she found the cradle.	And forth she gooth til she the cradel fond.
Ay, bless me! Then I would have made a mess of it!"	Ey, benedicite! Thanne hadde I foule ysped!"
I had almost gone to the clerks' bed.	I hadde almoost goon to the clerkes bed.
"Alas!" said she, "I had almost gone wrong;	"Allas!" quod she, "I hadde almoost mysgoon;
And groped here and there, but she found none.	And groped heer and ther, but she foond noon.
And came back, and began to miss her cradle,	And cam agayn, and gan hir cradel mysse,
And awoke, and went out to piss,	And gan awake, and wente hire out to pisse,
Soon after this the wife stopped her snoring,	Soone after this the wyf hir rowtyng leet,
And carried it quietly to the foot of his bed.	And baar it softe unto his beddes feet.
And up he rose, and quietly he went	And up he roos, and softely he wente
`The timid one is unlucky,' thus people say."	`Unhardy is unseely,' thus men sayth."
I will arise and chance it, by my faith!	I wil arise and auntre it, by my fayth!
I shall be considered a fool, a weakling!	I sal been halde a daf, a cokenay!
And when this trick is told another day,	And when this jape is tald another day,
And I lie like a sack of rubbish in my bed;	And I lye as a draf-sak in my bed;
He took a risk, and has accomplished his purpose,	He auntred hym, and has his nedes sped,
He has the miller's daughter in his arm.	He has the milleris doghter in his arm.
Yet has my fellow something for his harm;	Yet has my felawe somwhat for his harm;
"Alas!" said he, "this is a wicked trick;	"Allas!" quod he, "this is a wikked jape;
And to himself he laments and feels sorry.	And to hymself he maketh routhe and wo.
This John lies still five minutes or so,	This John lith stille a furlong wey or two,
Now play, Aleyn, for I will speak of John.	Now pley, Aleyn, for I wol speke of John.
And shortly to speak, they were together.	And shortly for to seyn, they were aton.
It was too late to cry out,	That it had been to late for to crie,
Until he was so near, before she could see him,	Til he so ny was, er she myghte espie,
This wench lay on her back and fast slept,	This wenche lay uprighte and faste slepte,
And up he rises, and by the wench he crept.	And up he rist, and by the wenche he crepte.
He might do injury to us both."	He myghte doon us bathe a vileynye."
"And if he out of his sleep suddenly awoke,	"And gif that he out of his sleep abreyde,
The miller is a perilous man," he said,	The millere is a perilous man," he seyde,
This John answered, "Alayn, be careful!	This John answerde, "Alayn, avyse thee!
By God's soul, it shall be no other way!"	By Goddes sale, it sal neen other bee!"
For my loss, I will have satisfaction.	Agayn my los, I will have esement.
And since I shall have no recompense	And syn I sal have neen amendement
And we have had a hard time all this day;	And we han had an il fit al this day;
Our grain is stolen, truly, it can not be denied,	Oure corn is stoln, sothly, it is na nay,
That if a man in one point is injured,	That gif a man in a point be agreved,
For, John, there is a law that says thus:	For, John, ther is a lawe that says thus:
Some redress the law has shaped for us,	Som esement has lawe yshapen us,
If I can, yon wench will I screw.	If that I may, yon wenche wil I swyve.
For, John," said he, "as ever I may thrive,	For, John," seyde he, "als evere moot I thryve,
But yet, no matter, all shall be for the best.	But yet, na fors, al sal be for the beste.
This long night there comes to me no sleep;	This lange nyght ther tydes me na reste;
Yes, they shall have the best (i.e., the worst) of a bad ending.	Ye, they sal have the flour of il endyng.
Who heard ever such an amazing thing?	Wha herkned evere slyk a ferly thyng?
Lo, such a compline (evening service) is made by them all;	Lo, swilk a complyn is ymel hem alle;
Heardest thou ever such a song before now?	Herdestow evere slyk a sang er now?
He poked John, and said, "Sleepest thou?	He poked John, and seyde, "Slepestow?
Aleyn the clerk, who heard this melody,	Aleyn the clerk, that herde this melodye,
The wench snores also, to keep them company.	The wenche rowteth eek, par compaignye.
One could hear their snoring two furlongs away;	Men myghte hir rowtyng heere two furlong;
His wife bore him a bass accompaniment, very loud;	His wyf bar hym a burdon, a ful strong;
And of his tail behind he took no heed.	Ne of his tayl bihynde he took no keep.
That he snorts like a horse in his sleep,	That as an hors he fnorteth in his sleep,
There was no more -- they needed no sleeping potion.	Ther nas na moore -- hem nedede no dwale.
To bed goes Aleyn and also John;	To bedde goth Aleyn and also John;
To bed went the daughter right away;	To bedde wente the doghter right anon;
And when all that was in the crock was drunk,	And whan that dronken al was in the crowke,
To rock, and to give the child to suck.	To rokken, and to yeve the child to sowke.
The cradle at her bed's feet is set,	The cradel at hir beddes feet is set,
So was her jolly whistle well wetted.	So was hir joly whistle wel ywet.
She was as cheerful and jolly as any jay,	As any jay she light was and jolyf,
To bed he goes, and with him goes his wife.	To bedde he goth, and with hym goth his wyf.
He belches, and he speaks through the nose	He yexeth, and he speketh thurgh the nose
Full pale he was for drunkenness, and not red.	Ful pale he was for dronken, and nat reed.
Well has this miller varnished his head (drank heavily);	Wel hath this millere vernysshed his heed;
About midnight they went to bed.	Aboute mydnyght wente they to reste.
And drink ever strong ale of the best quality.	And drynken evere strong ale atte beste.
They sup and they converse, to entertain themselves,	They soupen and they speke, hem to solace,
There was no larger lodging in the place.	Ther was no roumer herberwe in the place.
It could be no better, and (do you know) the cause why?	It myghte be no bet, and cause why?
Right in the same chamber side by side.	Right in the same chambre by and by.
Not ten feet or twelve from his own bed.	Noght from his owene bed ten foot or twelve.
With sheets and with blankets nicely spread	With sheetes and with chalons faire yspred
And in his own bedroom made them a bed,	And in his owene chambre hem made a bed,
And tied up their horse, it should no more go loose,	And boond hire hors, it sholde namoore go loos,
For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,	For ale and breed, and rosted hem a goos,
This miller into town his daughter sent	This millere into toun his doghter sende
Lo, here is our silver, ready to spend."	Loo, heere oure silver, redy for to spende."
With empty hand men may lure no hawks;	With empty hand men may na haukes tulle;
And we will pay truly at the full.	And we wil payen trewely atte fulle.
But specially I pray thee, host dear,	But specially I pray thee, hooste deere,
Such as he finds, or take such as he brings.'	Slyk as he fyndes, or taa slyk as he brynges.'
I have heard said, `Man shall take one of two things:	I have herd seyd, `Man sal taa of twa thynges:
Thou art always joking, and this is nicely answered.	Ay is thou myrie, and this is faire answerd.
"Now, Symond," said John, "by Saint Cuthbert,	"Now, Symond," seyde John, "by Seint Cutberd,
Or make it large by speech, as is your custom."	Or make it rowm with speche, as is youre gise."
Let's see now if this place may suffice,	Lat se now if this place may suffise,
A mile broad out of twenty feet of space.	A myle brood of twenty foot of space.
You know how by logical arguments to make a place	Ye konne by argumentes make a place
Such as it is, yet shall you have your share.	Swich as it is, yet shal ye have youre part.
The miller said in reply, "If there be any,	The millere seyde agayn, "If ther be eny,
For lodging and for refreshment, for their cash.	Of herberwe and of ese, as for hir peny.
But for the love of God they ask him	But for the love of God they hym bisoght
For it was night, and further they could not go;	For it was nyght, and forther myghte they noght;
The miller sitting by the fire he found,	The millere sittynge by the fyr he fond,
Toward the mill, and the horse Bayard in his hand.	Toward the mille, and Bayard in his hond.
Thus laments John as he goes by the way	Thus pleyneth John as he gooth by the way
And namely the miller, wellaway!"	And namely the millere, weylaway!"
Our grain is stolen; men will call us fools,	Oure corn is stoln; men wil us fooles calle,
Now are we driven to contempt and to scorn.	Now are we dryve til hethyng and til scorn.
"Alas," said John, "the day that I was born!	"Allas," quod John, "the day that I was born!
Comes hapless John, and with him comes Aleyn.	Comth sely John, and with him comth Aleyn.
Weary and wet, as a beast is in the rain,	Wery and weet, as beest is in the reyn,
Until in a ditch they caught him at the last.	Til in a dych they caughte hym atte laste.
Catch their horse, he ran always so fast,	Hir capul cacche, he ran alwey so faste,
They could not, though they did al their might,	They koude nat, though they dide al hir myght,
But shortly, until that it was truly night,	But shortly, til that it was verray nyght,
With "Stop! Stop! Stand! Stand! Down there, watch out behind,	With "Keep! Keep! Stand! Stand! Jossa, warderere,
These hapless clerks run up and down	Thise sely clerkes rennen up and doun
They will not catch him easily, by my crown."	They gete hym nat so lightly, by my croun."
Lo, there he goes! Yes, let the children play.	Lo, wher he gooth! Ye, lat the children pleye.
Despite all his learning; now let them go their way!	For al his art; now lat hem goon hir weye!
Yet can a miller make a clerk's beard (trick a clerk),	Yet kan a millere make a clerkes berd,
He said, "I suppose the clerks were leery (of what I might do).	He seyde, "I trowe the clerkes were aferd.
And ordered his wife to go knead it in a cake.	And bad his wyf go knede it in a cake.
He half a bushel of their flour has taken,	He half a busshel of hir flour hath take,
Toward the fen, both Aleyn and also John.	Toward the fen, bothe Aleyn and eek John.
These hapless clerks have run very fast	Thise sely clerkes han ful faste yronne
Bad luck! By God, Alayn, thou art a fool!"	Ilhayl! By God, Alayn, thou is a fonne!"
Why did thou not put the horse in the barn?	Why ne had thow pit the capul in the lathe?
By God's heart, he shall not escape us both!	By Goddes herte, he sal nat scape us bathe!
I am full strong (swift), God knows, as is a roe deer;	I is ful wight, God waat, as is a raa;
Lay down thy sword, and I will mine also.	Lay doun thy swerd, and I wil myn alswa.
"Alas," said John, "Aleyn, for Christ's pain	"Allas," quod John, "Aleyn, for Cristes peyne
And he that should have tied the rein better!"	And he that bettre sholde han knyt the reyne!"
With wild mares, as fast as he can go.	With wilde mares, as faste as he may go.
She said, "Alas! your horse goes to the fen	She seyde, "Allas! youre hors goth to the fen
The wife cam leaping inward at a run.	The wyf cam lepynge inward with a ren.
"What, which way is he gone?" he began to cry.	"What, whilk way is he geen?" he gan to crie.
All his skillful management was out of his mind.	Al was out of his mynde his housbondrie.
This Aleyn forgot everything, both meal and grain;	This Aleyn al forgat, bothe mele and corn;
Alas, our warden has lost his saddle horse."	Allas, our wardeyn has his palfrey lorn."
Step on thy feet! Come on, man, quickly!	Step on thy feet! Com of, man, al atanes!
Our horse is lost, Alayn, for God's bones,	Oure hors is lorn, Alayn, for Goddes banes,
This John goes out and finds his horse gone away,	This John goth out and fynt his hors away,
And when the meal is sacked and tied,	And whan the mele is sakked and ybounde,
Until their grain was completely ground.	Til that hir corn was faire and weel ygrounde.
But does his work, and with the clerks amused himself	But dooth his note, and with the clerkes pleyde
This miller goes back to the mill, no word he said,	This millere gooth agayn, no word he seyde,
And forth with "wehee," through thick and through thin.	And forth with "wehee," thurgh thikke and thurgh thenne.
Toward the fen, where wild mares run,	Toward the fen, ther wilde mares renne,
And when the horse was loose, he begins to go	And whan the hors was laus, he gynneth gon
He strips off the bridle right away.	He strepeth of the brydel right anon.
Behind the mill, under an arbor;	Bihynde the mille, under a levesel;
The clerks' horse, where it stood tied	The clerkes hors, ther as it stood ybounde
He looks up and down until he has found	He looketh up and doun til he hath founde
When he saw his time, quietly.	Whan that he saugh his tyme, softely.
Out at the door he goes full stealthily,	Out at the dore he gooth ful pryvely,
All their learning I reckon not worth a weed."	Of al hir art counte I noght a tare."
As once to the wolf thus spoke the mare.	As whilom to the wolf thus spak the mare.
`The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,'	`The gretteste clerkes been noght wisest men,'
Instead of flour yet will I give them bran.	In stide of flour yet wol I yeve hem bren.
The more ingenious tricks that they make,	The moore queynte crekes that they make,
Despite all the trickery in their philosophy.	For al the sleighte in hir philosophye.
But by my welfare, yet shall I blear their eyes (fool them),	But by my thrift, yet shal I blere hir ye,
They think that no man can trick them,	They wene that no man may hem bigyle,
And thought, "All this is done only for a trick.	And thoghte, "Al this nys doon but for a wyle.
This miller smiled at their foolishness,	This millere smyled of hir nycetee,
I am as poor a miller as you are."	I is as ille a millere as ar ye."
For John, in faith, I may be like you;	For John, y-faith, I may been of youre sort;
Into the trough; that shall be my sport.	Into the trough; that sal be my disport.
Then will I be beneath, by my head,	Thanne wil I be bynethe, by my croun,
Aleyn answered, "John, and wilt thou do so?	Aleyn answerde, "John, and wiltow swa?
How the hopper wags to and fro."	How that the hopur wagges til and fra."
Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,	Yet saugh I nevere, by my fader kyn,
Said John, "and see how the grain goes in.	Quod John, "and se howgates the corn gas in.
"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"	"By God, right by the hopur wil I stande,"
What will you do while it is being done?"	What wol ye doon whil that it is in hande?"
"It shall be done," said Symkyn, "by my faith!	"It shal be doon," quod Symkyn, "by my fay!
I pray you speed us hence as fast as you can."	I pray yow spede us heythen that ye may."
And therefore I am come, and also Alayn,	And forthy is I come, and eek Alayn,
So continually ache the teeth in his head;	Swa werkes ay the wanges in his heed;
Our manciple, I expect he will be dead,	Oure manciple, I hope he wil be deed,
Or else he is a fool, as clerks say.	Or elles he is a fool, as clerkes sayn.
He who has no servant must serve himself,	Hym boes serve hymself that has na swayn,
"Symond," said John, "by God, need knows no law.	"Symond," quod John, "by God, nede has na peer.
And John also, how now, what do you here?"	And John also, how now, what do ye heer?"
"Aleyn, welcome," said Symkyn, "by my life!	"Aleyn, welcome," quod Symkyn, "by my lyf!
How fares thy faire daughter and thy wife?"	Hou fares thy faire doghter and thy wyf?"
And at the mill he lays the sack down.	And at the mille the sak adoun he layth.
John knew the way -- they needed no guide --	John knew the wey -- hem nedede no gyde --
With good sword and with buckler by their sides.	With good swerd and with bokeler by hir syde.
Forth goes Aleyn the clerk, and also John,	Forth goth Aleyn the clerk, and also John,
And on a horse the sack he cast immediately.	And on an hors the sak he caste anon.
This Aleyn makes ready all his gear,	This Aleyn maketh redy al his gere,
Far in the north; I can not tell where.	Fer in the north; I kan nat telle where.
Of one town were they born, that was called Strother,	Of o toun were they born, that highte Strother,
John was called that one, and Aleyn was called that other;	John highte that oon, and Aleyn highte that oother;
Of grain by trickery, nor rob them by force;	Of corn by sleighte, ne by force hem reve;
The miller should not steal from them half a peck	The millere sholde not stele hem half a pekke
And boldly they dared pledge their necks	And hardily they dorste leye hir nekke
To go to the mill and see their grain ground;	To goon to mille and seen hir corn ygrounde;
To give them leave, for but a little while,	To yeve hem leve, but a litel stounde,
Upon the warden busily they implore	Upon the wardeyn bisily they crye
And, only for their mirth and amusement,	And, oonly for hire myrthe and revelrye,
Headstrong they were, and eager for sport,	Testif they were, and lusty for to pleye,
Who dwelt in this hall, of which I tell.	That dwelten in this halle, of which I seye.
He blustered fiercely, and swore it was not so.	He craketh boost, and swoor it was nat so.
But the miller thought that not worth a weed;	But therof sette the millere nat a tare;
For which the warden (of the college) complained and made a fuss.	For which the wardeyn chidde and made fare.
But now he was a thief excessively,	But now he was a theef outrageously,
For before this he stole but courteously,	For therbiforn he stal but curteisly,
A hundred times more than before;	An hundred tyme moore than biforn;
For which this miller stole both meal and grain	For which this millere stal bothe mele and corn
People thought indeed that he should die.	Men wenden wisly that he sholde dye.
The manciple lay sick with a malady;	Sik lay the maunciple on a maladye;
There their wheat and also their malt was ground.	Ther was hir whete and eek hir malt ygrounde.
People call the Soler Hall at Cambridge;	Men clepen the Soler Halle at Cantebregge;
And namely there was an important college	And nameliche ther was a greet collegge
With wheat and malt of all the land about;	With whete and malt of al the land aboute;
A profitable monopoly on milling has this miller, out of doubt,	Greet sokene hath this millere, out of doute,
Though he holy church should devour.	Though that he hooly chirche sholde devoure.
Therefore he would his holy blood honor,	Therfore he wolde his hooly blood honoure,
To holy church's blood, which is descended from the church.	On hooly chirches blood, that is descended.
For holy church's goods must be dispensed	For hooly chirches good moot been despended
His purpose was to bestow her high	His purpos was for to bistowe hire hye
And he raised difficulties about her marriage.	And straunge he made it of hir mariage.
Both of his property and his household,	Bothe of his catel and his mesuage,
Was determined to make her his heir,	In purpos was to maken hire his heir,
This parson of the town, because she was fair,	This person of the toun, for she was feir,
But right fair was her hair; I will not lie.	But right fair was hire heer; I wol nat lye.
With buttocks broad and breasts round and high.	With buttokes brode and brestes rounde and hye.
With pug nose and eyes gray as glass,	With kamus nose and eyen greye as glas,
This wench was thick and well grown,	This wenche thikke and wel ygrowen was,
Except for a child that was a half year of age;	Savynge a child that was of half yeer age;
Of twenty years of age, without any more,	Of twenty yeer, withouten any mo,
A daughter had they between them two	A doghter hadde they bitwixe hem two
Which she had learned in the nunnery.	That she hadde lerned in the nonnerie.
Considering her family and her education	What for hire kynrede and hir nortelrie
She thought that a lady should be aloof,	Hir thoughte that a lady sholde hire spare,
And full of disdain and of scorn.	And ful of hoker and of bisemare.
She was as haughty as water in a ditch,	She was as digne as water in a dich,
And also, because she was a bit besmirched (by her illegitimacy),	And eek, for she was somdel smoterlich,
For jealous folk are dangerous always --	For jalous folk ben perilous everemo --
With cutlass, or with knife, or dagger.	With panade, or with knyf, or boidekyn.
Unless he wished to be slain by Symkyn	But if he wolde be slayn of Symkyn
That dared flirt with her or once play,	That with hire dorste rage or ones pleye,
There was no one so brave that went by the way	Was noon so hardy that wente by the weye
There dared no one call her anything but "lady";	Ther dorste no wight clepen hire but "dame";
And Symkyn had hose of the same color.	And Symkyn hadde hosen of the same.
And she came after in a gown of red;	And she cam after in a gyte of reed;
With the tip of his hood wound about his head,	With his typet wounde aboute his heed,
A very fair sight was it to look upon those two;	A ful fair sighte was it upon hem two;
And she was proud, and brazen as is a magpie.	And she was proud, and peert as is a pye.
To preserve his state of yeomanry.	To saven his estaat of yomanrye.
Unless she were well educated and a virgin,	But she were wel ynorissed and a mayde,
For Symkyn would have no wife, as he said,	For Symkyn wolde no wyf, as he sayde,
She was fostered in a nunnery;	She was yfostred in a nonnerye;
So that Symkyn should be allied with his family.	For that Symkyn sholde in his blood allye.
With her he gave very many a pan of brass,	With hire he yaf ful many a panne of bras,
The parson of the town was her father.	The person of the toun hir fader was.
His name was called haughty Symkyn.	His name was hoote deynous Symkyn.
And that a sly one, and accustomed to steal.	And that a sly, and usaunt for to stele.
A thief he was, in truth, of grain and meal,	A theef he was for sothe of corn and mele,
That he did not swear he should pay for it right away.	That he ne swoor he sholde anon abegge.
There dared no person lay hand upon him,	Ther dorste no wight hand upon hym legge,
He was a quarrelsome bully in every way.	He was a market-betere atte fulle.
As bald as an ape was his skull.	As piled as an ape was his skulle.
Round was his face, and he had a pug nose;	Round was his face, and camus was his nose;
A Sheffield knife he carried in his hose.	A Sheffeld thwitel baar he in his hose.
An elegant dagger he carried in his pouch;	A joly poppere baar he in his pouche;
And very sharp was the blade of the sword.	And of a swerd ful trenchant was the blade.
Always by his belt he carried a long cutlass,	Ay by his belt he baar a long panade,
And play a drinking game, and well wrestle and shoot;	And turne coppes, and wel wrastle and sheete;
He could play the bagpipe and fish, and mend nets,	Pipen he koude and fisshe, and nettes beete,
As any peacock he was proud and gay.	As any pecok he was proud and gay.
A miller was there dwelling many a day.	A millere was ther dwellynge many a day.
And this is absolute truth that I tell you:	And this is verray sooth that I yow telle:
Upon the which brook there stands a mill;	Upon the whiche brook ther stant a melle;
At Trumpington, not far from Cambridge,	At Trumpyngtoun, nat fer fro Cantebrigge,
Here begins the Reeves Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Reves Tale.
But in his own he can not see a large piece of timber."	But in his owene he kan nat seen a balke."
He can well in my eye see a piece of straw,	He kan wel in myn eye seen a stalke,
I pray to God his neck may break into pieces;	I pray to God his nekke mote to-breke;
Right in his churl's terms will I speak.	Right in his cherles termes wol I speke.
And, by your leave, I shall repay him right now;	And, by youre leve, I shal hym quite anoon;
Perhaps in scorn, for I am one.	Peraventure in scorn, for I am oon.
How a carpenter was tricked,	How that bigyled was a carpenteer,
For it is permissable to repel force with force.	For leveful is with force force of-showve.
Though I answer (him), and somewhat make a fool of him;	Thogh I answere, and somdeel sette his howve;
"I pray yow all that you not be displeased,	"I pray yow alle that ye nat yow greve,
"Now, sires," said this Osewold the Reeve,	"Now, sires," quod this Osewold the Reve,
It is well time to begin thy tale."	It were al tyme thy tale to bigynne."
Lo Greenwich, in which is many a rascal!	Lo Grenewych, ther many a shrewe is inne!
Lo Deptford, and it is almost seven thirty!	Lo Depeford, and it is half-wey pryme!
Say forth thy tale, and do not waste the time.	Sey forth thy tale, and tarie nat the tyme.
Or of a cobbler made a shipman or a physician.	Or of a soutere a shipman or a leche.
What! shall we speak all day of holy writ?	What shul we speke alday of hooly writ?
He said, "What amounts all this wit?	He seide, "What amounteth al this wit?
He began to speak as lordly as a king.	He gan to speke as lordly as a kyng.
When our Host had heard this sermon making,	Whan that oure Hoost hadde herd this sermonyng,
With old folk, save dotage, there is no more!"	With olde folk, save dotage, is namoore!"
About wretchedness that passed long ago;	Of wrecchednesse that passed is ful yoore;
The foolish tongue may well ring and chime	The sely tonge may wel rynge and chymbe
The stream of life now drops on the rim.	The streem of lyf now droppeth on the chymbe.
Until the barrel is almost all empty.	Til that almoost al empty is the tonne.
Death turned on the spigot of life and let it flow,	Deeth drough the tappe of lyf and leet it gon,
For surely, when I was born, immediately	For sikerly, whan I was bore, anon
Since my tap of life began to run.	Syn that my tappe of lif bigan to renne.
As many years as have passed hence	As many a yeer as it is passed henne
And yet I have always a young man's desires,	And yet ik have alwey a coltes tooth,
But desire shall not be lacking, that is truth.	But wyl ne shal nat faillen, that is sooth.
Our old limbs may well be feeble,	Oure olde lemes mowe wel been unweelde,
These four little sparks belong to old age.	Thise foure sparkles longen unto eelde.
Boasting, lying, anger, greed;	Avauntyng, liyng, anger, coveitise;
Yet in our old ashes fire is raked over (covered).	Yet in oure asshen olde is fyr yreke.
For when we can not do anything, then will we talk about it;	For whan we may nat doon, than wol we speke;
Our will desires folly continually.	Oure wyl desireth folie evere in oon.
As a leek has; for though our power is gone,	As hath a leek; for thogh oure myght be goon,
To have a white head and a green tail,	To have an hoor heed and a grene tayl,
For in our will there sticks ever a nail,	For in oure wyl ther stiketh evere a nayl,
We dance always while the world will pipe.	We hoppen alwey whil that the world wol pype.
Until we are rotten, we can not be ripe;	Til we be roten, kan we nat be rype;
We old men, I fear, fare like that:	We olde men, I drede, so fare we:
That same fruit continually grows worse,	That ilke fruyt is ever lenger the wers,
Unless I fare as does the fruit of the medlar --	But if I fare as dooth an open-ers --
My heart is as moldy as my hairs,	Myn herte is also mowled as myne heris,
This white head reveals my old years;	This white top writeth myne olde yeris;
Grass time is done; my fodder is now dry straw;	Gras tyme is doon; my fodder is now forage;
But I am old; because of age I do not want to play;	But ik am oold; me list not pley for age;
If I wanted to speak of ribaldry.	If that me liste speke of ribaudye.
With (a tale of the) blearing of a proud miller's eye (tricking him),	With bleryng of a proud milleres ye,
"As I may prosper," said he, "very well could I repay thee	"So theek," quod he, "ful wel koude I thee quite
A little anger is left in his heart;	A litel ire is in his herte ylaft;
Because he was of the carpenter's craft,	By cause he was of carpenteris craft,
Except for only Osewold the Reeve.	But it were oonly Osewold the Reve.
And at this tale I saw no man aggrieved,	Ne at this tale I saugh no man hym greve,
But for the most part they laughed and enjoyed themselves.	But for the moore part they loughe and pleyde.
Different folk said different opinions,	Diverse folk diversely they seyde,
Of Absolon and clever Nicholas,	Of Absolon and hende Nicholas,
When folk had laughed at this foolish business	Whan folk hadde laughen at this nyce cas
The Prologue of Reeve's Tale.	The Prologe of the Reves Tale.
In which, unto this day, in noble manner,	In which, into this day, in noble wyse,
Saint Urban consecrated it, as he well could;	Seint Urban halwed it, as he wel myghte;
Her house is called the church of Saint Cecilie;	Hir hous the chirche of Seint Cecilie highte;
Among his other saints decently.	Among his othere seintes honestly.
Fetched the body and buried it by night	The body fette and buryed it by nyghte
Saint Urban with his deacons secretly	Seint Urban with his deknes prively
Here of my house perpetually a church."	Heere of myn hous perpetuelly a cherche."
These souls, lo, and that I might have made	Thise soules, lo, and that I myghte do werche
To commend to you, ere I go,	To recomende to yow, er that I go,
And said, "I asked this of heaven's king,	And seyde, "I axed this of hevene kyng,
And to the Pope Urban (she) entrusted them then,	And to the Pope Urban bitook hem tho,
And she gave them her personal property and her things,	And hem she yaf hir moebles and hir thyng,
That she had fostered; to them she did preach,	That she hadde fostred; hem she gan to preche,
And never ceased to teach them the faith	And nevere cessed hem the feith to teche
Three days she lived in this torment,	Thre dayes lyved she in this torment,
With sheets have very carefully taken up the blood.	With sheetes han the blood ful faire yhent.
The Christian folk, who were about her,	The Cristen folk, which that aboute hire were,
He left her lie, and on his way he went.	He lefte hir lye, and on his wey he went.
This executioner dared not do any more,	This tormentour ne dorste do namoore,
The fourth stroke to smite, soft or sore,	The ferthe strook to smyten, softe or soore,
That no man should do any one such pain	That no man sholde doon man swich penaunce
And because there was that time an ordinance	And for ther was that tyme an ordinaunce
He could not smite all her neck in two;	He myghte noght smyte al hir nekke atwo;
The executioner, but in no sort of way	The tormentour, but for no maner chaunce
Three strokes in the neck he smote her then,	Thre strokes in the nekke he smoot hire tho,
Sent his messenger to slay her in the bath.	To sleen hire in the bath his sonde sente.
For that Almachius, with completely wicked intent,	For he Almachius, with ful wikke entente,
It made her not a drop to sweat.	It made hire nat a drope for to sweete.
She sat all cool and felt no pain.	She sat al coold and feelede no wo.
Despite the fire and also the bath's heat	For al the fyr and eek the bathes heete
The long night, and also a day as well,	The longe nyght, and eek a day also,
And night and day they fed great fire under it.	And nyght and day greet fyr they under betten.
For they did shut her fast in a cauldron,	For in a bath they gonne hire faste shetten,
And as he ordered, exactly so the deed was done;	And as he bad, right so was doon the dede;
"Burn her right in a bath of red flames."	"Brenne hire right in a bath of flambes rede."
Home to her house, and "In her house," said he,	Hom til hir hous, and "In hire hous," quod he,
These words and others such said she,	Thise wordes and swiche othere seyde she,
For in fact they are not worth a penny."	For in effect they been nat worth a myte."
Can do no profit to thee nor to themselves,	To thee ne to hemself mowen noght profite,
And these images, thou canst well see,	And thise ymages, wel thou mayst espye,
That mighty God is in his high heavens;	That myghty God is in his hevenes hye;
For without exception men know it well everywhere	For communly men woot it wel overal
So scorn thee and laugh at thy folly,	So scorne thee and laughe at thy folye,
"It is a shame that the people shall	"It is a shame that the peple shal
Since thou seest not with thy blind eyes.	Syn that thou seest nat with thyne eyen blynde.
I advise thee, let thine hand upon it fall	I rede thee, lat thyn hand upon it falle
That same stone a god thou wilt call it.	That ilke stoon a god thow wolt it calle.
That it is stone -- that men can well see --	That it is stoon -- that men may wel espyen --
Except that thou art blind; for thing that we all see	That thou n' art blynd; for thyng that we seen alle
"There lacks nothing to thine outer eyes	"Ther lakketh no thyng to thyne outter yen
An ignorant officer and a foolish judge.	A lewed officer and a veyn justise.
And that thou were in every sort of way	And that thou were in every maner wise
That I did not know therewith thy foolishness	That I ne knew therwith thy nycetee
Thou saidest no word since thou spoke to me	Thou seydest no word syn thou spak to me
Which thou spekest of our gods here," said he.	That thou spekest of oure goddes heere," quod he.
"But those same wrongs I can not endure	"But thilke wronges may I nat endure
For I can suffer it as a philosopher;	For I kan suffre it as a philosophre;
I care not what wrong that thou may express to me,	I recche nat what wrong that thou me profre,
"And sacrifice to our gods ere thou go!	"And sacrifice to oure goddes er thou go!
"Do away thy boldness," said Almachius then,	"Do wey thy booldnesse," seyde Almachius tho,
Thou liest, for thy power is strictly limited.	Thou lyest, for thy power is ful naked."
Minister of death; for if thou speak of more,	Ministre of deeth; for if thou speke of mo,
"But thou can say thy princes have made thee	"But thou mayst seyn thy princes han thee maked
Thou, who can only take away life,	Thou, that ne mayst but oonly lyf bireve,
Both to slay and to give life to a person;	Bothe for to sleen and for to quyken a wight;
Thou sayest thy princes have given thee power	Thou seyst thy princes han thee yeven myght
That thou hast made a very great lie here.	That thou hast maad a ful gret lesyng heere.
Then will I show all openly, according to law,	Thanne wol I shewe al openly, by right,
"And if thou dread not to hear a truth,	"And if thou drede nat a sooth to heere,
We hate that same deadly sin of pride.	We haten deedly thilke vice of pryde.
"Not proudly, for I say, as for my side,	"Nat proudly, for I seye, as for my syde,
"I speak only faithfully," said she;	"I speke noght but stedfastly," quod she;
To make folk to die or to live?	To maken folk to dyen or to lyven?
Yea, both power and authority	Ye, bothe power and auctoritee
"Have not our mighty princes to me given,	"Han noght oure myghty princes to me yiven,
Knowest thou not how far my power can stretch?	Ne woostow nat how fer my myght may strecche?
To whom Almachius, "Miserable wretch,	To whom Almachius, "Unsely wrecche,
He stares, and goes mad in his mind!"	He stareth, and woodeth in his advertence!"
"Lo, he hides his true feelings here in open court;	"Lo, he dissymuleth heere in audience;
To make myself a wicked person?" said she.	To make me a wikked wight?" quod shee.
Wilt thou that I renounce innocence,	Woltow that I reneye innocence,
Began to laugh, and to the judge said:	Gan for to laughe, and to the juge sayde:
At which the holy blissful fair maid	At which the hooly blisful faire mayde
So that thou can now escape by that means."	That thou mowe now escapen by that weye."
Do sacrifice, or renounce Christendom,	Do sacrifice, or Cristendom reneye,
Almache answered, "Chose one of these two:	Almache answerde, "Chees oon of thise two:
To be so virtuous, we can not deny it."	For vertuous, we may it nat withseye."
"But we who know that same name	"But we that knowen thilke name so
You accuse us of a crime and also (put on us) the blame for it.	Ye putte on us a cryme and eek a blame.
To Christ, and because we bear a Christian name,	To Crist, and for we bere a Cristen name,
For you, who know well our innocence,	For ye, that knowen wel oure innocence,
You make us guilty, and it is not true.	Ye make us gilty, and it is nat sooth.
Said then Cecile, "and with a crazy verdict	Quod tho Cecile, "and with a wood sentence
"Your princes err, as your nobles do,"	"Yowre princes erren, as youre nobleye dooth,"
And go all free, if he will deny it?"	And goon al quit, if he wole it reneye?"
Unless he renounce his Christian faith,	But if that he his Cristendom withseye,
That every Christian person shall be punished	That every Cristen wight shal han penaunce
Have thus commanded and made a law	Han thus comanded and maad ordinaunce
Dost thou not know how our mighty noble princes	Wostow nat how oure myghty princes free
"Full wrongfully thou began," said he,	"Ful wrongfully bigonne thow," quod he,
Can all the arrogance of it be laid full low."	May al the boost of it be leyd ful lowe."
For with a needle's point, when it is blown up,	For with a nedles poynt, whan it is blowe,
But only like a bladder full of wind, indeed.	But lyk a bladdre ful of wynd, ywys.
For every mortal man's power is nothing	For every mortal mannes power nys
"Your might," said she, "is very little to fear,	"Youre myght," quod she, "ful litel is to dreede,
Of my power?" And she answered him this:	Of my power?" And she answerde hym this:
Almachius said, "Takest thou no heed	Almachius seyde, "Ne takestow noon heede
"Of conscience and of sincere good faith."	"Of conscience and of good feith unfeyned."
"Of whence comes thine answering so rude?"	"Of whennes comth thyn answeryng so rude?"
Almache answered unto that refutation,	Almache answerde unto that similitude,
In one question; you asked ignorantly."	In o demande; ye axed lewedly."
Said she, "you who would include two answers	Quod she, "that wolden two answeres conclude
"You have begun your question foolishly,"	"Ye han bigonne youre questioun folily,"
About thy religion and about thy belief."	Of thy religioun and of thy bileeve."
"I ask thee," said he, "though it may grieve thee,	"I axe thee," quod he, "though it thee greeve,
"I am a gentle woman born," said she.	"I am a gentil womman born," quod she.
"What sort of woman art thou?" then said he.	"What maner womman artow?" tho quod he.
Ordered (his men to) fetch Cecile, so that he might see her	Bad fecchen Cecile, that he myghte hire see,
Almachius, that heard of this business,	Almachius, that herde of this doynge,
This unanimously we believe, even if we should die!"	This with o voys we trowen, thogh we sterve!"
That has so good a servant to serve Him.	That hath so good a servant hym to serve.
Is true God -- this is the belief of us all --	Is verray God -- this is al oure sentence --
"Christ, God's Son, without difference [between Father and Son],	"Crist, Goddes Sone, withouten difference,
Unto her word, and cried more and more,	Unto hire word, and cryden moore and moore,
Wept very bitterly, and gave full credence	Wepten ful soore, and yaven ful credence
But they, converted by her wise teaching,	But they, converted at hir wise loore,
Cecile, so that she might in his presence	Cecile, so that she myghte in his presence
Ordered his ministers to fetch publicly	Bad his ministres fecchen openly
And after this, Almachius hastily	And after this, Almachius hastily
Within their burying place, under the tombstone;	Withinne hire buriyng place, under the stoon;
By Tiburce and Valerian tenderly	By Tiburce and Valerian softely
Cecile took him and buried him straightway	Cecile hym took and buryed hym anon
With whip tipped with lead that he left his life.	With whippe of leed til he his lif gan lete.
For which Almachius had him so beaten	For which Almachius dide hym so bete
And with his word converted many a person;	And with his word converted many a wight;
That he saw their souls glide to heaven	That he hir soules saugh to hevene glyde
With piteous tears told it right away,	With pitous teeris tolde it anonright,
This Maximus, who saw this thing happen,	This Maximus, that saugh this thyng bityde,
Their souls went to the King of grace.	Hir soules wenten to the Kyng of grace.
And lost both their heads in the place.	And losten bothe hir hevedes in the place.
With humble heart and steadfast devotion,	With humble herte and sad devocioun,
But on their knees they set themselves down	But on hir knees they setten hem adoun
They would not incense nor sacrifice in any way,	They nolde encense ne sacrifise right noght,
To tell shortly the conclusion,	To tellen shortly the conclusioun,
Men led them forth to do the sacrifice.	Men ledde hem forth to doon the sacrefise.
And when this thing was said as I tell,	And whan this thyng was seyd as I devyse,
Shall give it to you, as you have deserved it."	Shal yeve it yow, as ye han it deserved."
The rightful Judge, whom you have served,	The rightful Juge, which that ye han served,
Go to the crown of life that can not fail;	Gooth to the corone of lif that may nat faille;
Your race is done, your faith you have maintained.	Youre cours is doon, youre feith han ye conserved.
"You have truly done a great battle,	"Ye han for sothe ydoon a greet bataille,
And arm yourselves in armor of brightness.	And armeth yow in armure of brightnesse.
Cast away all the works of darkness,	Cast alle awey the werkes of derknesse,
Cecile said to them with a full steadfast countenance,	Cecile hem seyde with a ful stedefast cheere,
And afterward, when day was grown light,	And afterward, whan day was woxen light,
With priests who christened them all together;	With preestes that hem cristned alle yfeere;
Cecile came, when it was grown night,	Cecile cam, whan it was woxen nyght,
The false faith, (and brought them) to believe in God alone.	The false feith, to trowe in God allone.
And from Maxime, and from his folk each one of them,	And fro Maxime, and fro his folk echone,
They did take away from the executioners,	They gonnen fro the tormentours to reve,
And with their preaching, ere that it was evening,	And with hir prechyng, er that it were eve,
And led them to his house without more delay,	And ladde hem to his hous withoute moore,
When Maximus had heard the saints' teaching,	Whan Maximus had herd the seintes loore,
He himself wept for pity that he had.	Hymself he weep for pitee that he hadde.
Seized them, and when he led forth the saints,	Hem hente, and whan he forth the seintes ladde,
Of the prefect's, and his chief assistant,	Of the prefectes, and his corniculer,
One Maximus, that was an officer	Oon Maximus, that was an officer
Immediately these martyrs of whom I tell you,	Anon thise martirs that I yow devyse,
Strike off his head; this is my sentence here."	Swape of his heed; this my sentence heer."
And said, "Whoever will not sacrifice,	And seyde, "Whoso wol nat sacrifise,
And sent them to the image of Jupiter,	And to the ymage of Juppiter hem sente,
And brought them before Almache, the prefect,	And hem biforn Almache, the prefect, broghte,
The officers of the law of the town of Rome sought them,	The sergeantz of the toun of Rome hem soghte,
But at the last, to tell short and plain,	But atte laste, to tellen short and pleyn,
How many wonders Jesus made for them;	How manye wondres Jhesus for hem wroghte;
It would be very hard in proper sequence to say	It were ful hard by ordre for to seyn
That he asked of God was provided immediately.	That he God axed, it was sped ful soone.
The angel of God; and every manner of gift	The aungel of God; and every maner boone
That every day in real time and space he saw	That every day he saugh in tyme and space
And after this Tiburce got such grace	And after this Tiburce gat swich grace
He christened him and made him in that place	He cristned hym and made hym in that place
Who thanked God, and with glad and happy heart	That thanked God, and with glad herte and light
With Valerian he went to Pope Urban,	With Valerian to Pope Urban he wente,
And after this Tiburce with a good will	And after this Tiburce in good entente
All this thing she told unto Tiburce.	Al this thyng she unto Tiburce tolde.
Which was bound in sin and painful cares;	That was ybounde in synne and cares colde;
To provide full forgiveness for mankind,	To doon mankynde pleyn remissioun,
How God's Son was compelled to remain in this world	How Goddes Sone in this world was withholde
And many particulars of His passion;	And manye pointes of his passioun;
Then very zealously she did preach to him	Tho gan she hym ful bisily to preche
Three persons may right well be there."	Thre persones may ther right wel bee."
So in one being of divinity,	So in o beynge of divinitee,
Memory, imagination, and judgement also --	Memorie, engyn, and intellect also --
Exactly as a man has three mental faculties --	Right as a man hath sapiences three --
"That shall I tell," said she, "ere I go.	"That shal I telle," quod she, "er I go.
And now of three how canst thou bear witness?"	And now of three how maystow bere witnesse?"
There is but one God, lord in truthfulness?	Ther nys but o God, lord in soothfastnesse?
Said thou not just now in this manner,	Ne seydestow right now in this manere,
That there was another life where men may dwell."	That ther was oother lyf ther men may wone."
When he was in this world, declared here	Whan he was in this world, declared heere
"By word and by miracle high God's Son,	"By word and by myracle heigh Goddes Sone,
Has given them souls, without any doubt.	Hath sowled hem, withouten any drede.
The Holy Ghost, who from the Father did proceed,	The Goost, that fro the Fader gan procede,
And all that is created (and endowed) with the power of reason;	And al that wroght is with a skilful thoght;
That Father's Son has created all things,	That Fadres Sone hath alle thyng ywroght,
Which God's Son told us by means of his grace.	Which Goddes Sone us tolde thurgh his grace.
That never shall be lost, doubt thee not,	That nevere shal be lost, ne drede thee noght,
If this were the only life and (there were) none other.	If this were lyvynge oonly and noon oother.
To lose this life, my own dear brother,	This lyf to lese, myn owene deere brother,
"Men might well and reasonably fear	"Men myghten dreden wel and skilfully
To whom Cecile answered boldly,	To whom Cecile answerde boldely,
Nevertheless we shall be burned in this world!"	Algate ybrend in this world shul we be!"
That is hidden secretly in heaven,	That is yhid in hevene pryvely,
"And while we seek that same divinity	"And whil we seken thilke divinitee
And we too (would burn), to bear him company;	And we also, to bere hym compaignye;
If he were found, or if men could catch sight of him,	If he were founde, or that men myghte hym spye,
And dares not once put forth his head?	And dar nat ones putte forth his heed?
And dwells in hiding places always (going) from one to another,	And woneth in halkes alwey to and fro,
"That is so often condemned to be dead,	"That is so ofte dampned to be deed,
"Thou meanest not Urban," said he then,	"Ne menestow nat Urban," quod he tho,
It seems to me that it would be a wonderful deed.	Me thynketh that it were a wonder dede.
Said then Tiburce, "wilt thou lead me there?	Quod tho Tiburce, "woltow me thider lede?
"To Urban? My brother Valerian,"	"Til Urban? Brother myn Valerian,"
I will lead thee unto the Pope Urban."	I wol thee lede unto the Pope Urban."
"To whom?" said he, "come forth with right good cheer,	"To whom?" quod he, "com forth with right good cheere,
Tiburce answered and said, "Brother dear,	Tiburce answerde and seyde, "Brother deere,
The angel's face of which thy brother told."	The angels face of which thy brother tolde."
And make thyself clean, so that thou can behold	And make thee clene, so that thou mowe biholde
Go with thy brother now, and get thyself baptized,	Go with thy brother now, and thee baptise,
Since thou will despise thine idols.	Syn that thou wolt thyne ydoles despise.
Right now here I take thee for my kinsman,	Anon for myn allye heer take I thee,
"Made me thy brother's wife, exactly in that manner	"Made me thy brotheres wyf, right in that wise
"Lo, exactly as the love of Christ," said she,	"Lo, right so as the love of Crist," quod she,
And after that she said as you may hear:	And after that she seyde as ye may heere:
"This day I take thee for my kinsman,"	"This day I take thee for myn allye,"
And was very glad he could perceive truth.	And was ful glad he koude trouthe espye.
And she who heard this did kiss his breast,	And she gan kisse his brest, that herde this,
Tiburce then said, "if I shall not lie."	Quod tho Tiburce, "if that I shal nat lye."
"Whoever believes not this, he is a beast,"	"Whoso that troweth nat this, a beest he is,"
And (she) ordered him to leave his idols.	And charged hym his ydoles for to leve.
For they are dumb, and moreover they are deaf,	For they been dombe, and therto they been deve,
That all idols are but meaningless things,	That alle ydoles nys but a thyng in veyn,
Then Cecile showed him all open and plain	Tho shewed hym Cecile al open and pleyn
The world has known what it is worth, certainly,	The world hath wist what it is worth, certeyn,
"The maid has brought these men to bliss above;	"The mayde hath broght thise men to blisse above;
And made his angel bring them the crowns.	And made his angel hem the corones brynge.
Two crowns of flowers well smelling,	Corones two of floures wel smellynge,
To which God of his goodness would provide	To whiche God of his bountee wolde shifte
Witness Tyburce's and Valerian's confession,	Witnesse Tyburces and [Valerians] shrifte,
The world and also her bed-chamber did she give up;	The world and eek hire chambre gan she weyve;
Saint Cecile, completely filled with God's gift,	Seinte Cecile, fulfild of Goddes yifte,
"In order to receive the palm of martyrdom,	"The palm of martirdom for to receyve,
Solemnly this noble dear Doctor (of the Church)	Solempnely this noble doctour deere
Saint Ambrose in his preface is pleased to speak;	Seint Ambrose in his preface list to seye;
And of the miracle of these two crowns	And of the myracle of thise corones tweye
The idols and be chaste, and otherwise nothing (will you see.)"	The ydoles and be clene, and elles naught."
Which thou shalt see, if thou wilt renounce	Which thou shalt seen, if that thou wolt reneye
"The angel of God has taught me the truth	"The aungel of God hath me the trouthe ytaught
Said Valerian, "That I shall tell thee.	Quod Valerian, "That shal I thee devyse.
"How knowest thou this?" said Tiburce, "and in what manner?"	"How woostow this?" quod Tiburce, "and in what wyse?"
But now for the first time our dwelling is in truth."	But now at erst in trouthe oure dwellyng is."
"In dreams," said Valerian, "have we been	"In dremes," quod Valerian, "han we be
In actuality, or do I hear this in dream?"	In soothnesse, or in dreem I herkne this?"
Tiburce answered, "Sayest thou this to me	Tiburce answerde, "Seistow this to me
Believe correctly and know real truth."	Bileve aright and knowen verray trouthe."
If it so be thou will, without delaying,	If it so be thou wolt, withouten slouthe,
So shalt thou see them, beloved brother dear,	So shaltow seen hem, leeve brother deere,
And as thou smellest them because of my prayer,	And as thou smellest hem thurgh my preyere,
Which thine eyes have no power to see;	Whiche that thyne eyen han no myght to see;
Snow white and rose red, that shine clear,	Snow white and rose reed, that shynen cleere,
Has changed me all into another nature."	Hath chaunged me al in another kynde."
The sweet smell that in my heart I find	The sweete smel that in myn herte I fynde
The fragrance could go in me no deeper.	The savour myghte in me no depper go.
For even if I had them in my two hands,	For though I hadde hem in myne handes two,
Of rose and lilies that I smell here.	Of rose and lilies that I smelle heer.
Whence that sweet fragrance comes so (much)	Whennes that soote savour cometh so
And said, "I wonder, this time of the year,	And seyde, "I wondre, this tyme of the yeer,
Within his heart he began to wonder intently,	Withinne his herte he gan to wondre faste,
Which the roses and the lilies cast forth	Which that the roses and the lilies caste,
And with that word Tiburce his brother came.	And with that word Tiburce his brother coom.
You shall come unto his blissful feast."	Ye shullen come unto his blisful feste."
And both (of you) with the palm of martyrdom	And bothe with the palm of martirdom
The angel said, "God likes thy request,	The angel seyde, "God liketh thy requeste,
To know the truth, as I do in this place."	To knowe the trouthe, as I do in this place."
I pray you that my brother may have grace	I pray yow that my brother may han grace
"And in this world I love no man so much.	"That in this world I love no man so.
"I have a brother," said Valerian then,	"I have a brother," quod Valerian tho,
Say what pleases thee, and thou shalt have thy request."	Sey what thee list, and thou shalt han thy boone."
"And thou, Valerian, because thou so soon	"And thow, Valerian, for thow so soone
Unless he be chaste and hates villainy.	But he be chaast and hate vileynye.
Nor never a person shall see them with his eye,	Ne nevere wight shal seen hem with his ye,
Nor lose their sweet fragrance, trust me;	Ne lese hir soote savour, trusteth me;
Nor never ever shall they be rotten,	Ne nevere mo ne shal they roten bee,
"From paradise I have brought them to you,	"Fro paradys to yow have I hem broght,
Always guard well these crowns," said he;	Kepeth ay wel thise corones," quod he;
"With body clean and with unblemished thought	"With body clene and with unwemmed thoght
That other to Valerian, her mate.	That oother to Valerian, hir make.
And first to Cecile, as I understand,	And first to Cecile, as I understonde,
Two crowns, which he bore in hand;	Corones two, the which he bar in honde;
This angel had of roses and of lily	This angel hadde of roses and of lilie
Within his room standing with an angel.	Withinne his chambre with an angel stonde.
Valerian goes home and finds Cecilie	Valerian gooth hoom and fynt Cecilie
And Pope Urban christened him right there.	And Pope Urban hym cristned right there.
Then vanished this old man, he knew not where,	Tho vanysshed this olde man, he nyste where,
No person under the heaven can imagine."	Under the hevene no wight thynke may."
"For truer thing than this, I dare well say,	"For sother thyng than this, I dar wel say,
"Dost thou believe this thing or not? Say yes or no."	"Leevestow this thyng or no? Sey ye or nay."
When this was read, then said this old man,	Whan this was rad, thanne seyde this olde man,
These words were written all with gold.	Thise wordes al with gold ywriten were.
Above all and over all everywhere."	Aboven alle and over alle everywhere."
One baptism, and Father of all also,	O Cristendom, and Fader of alle also,
"One Lord, one faith, one God, without more,	"O Lord, o feith, o God, withouten mo,
And from his book right thus he began to read:	And on his book right thus he gan to rede:
When he saw him, and the old man picked him up then,	Whan he hym saugh, and he up hente hym tho,
Valerian as if dead fell down for fear	Valerian as deed fil doun for drede
Who had in hand a book with lettering of gold ,	That hadde a book with lettre of gold in honde,
An old man, clad in clear white clothes,	An oold man, clad in white clothes cleere,
And with that word anon there did appear	And with that word anon ther gan appeere
As meek as ever was any lamb, to you!"	As meke as evere was any lomb, to yow!"
Very like a fierce lion, she sends here,	Ful lyk a fiers leoun, she sendeth heere,
"For that same spouse that she took just now	"For thilke spouse that she took but now
Always thine own servant Cecile serves Thee.	Thee serveth ay thyn owene thral Cecile.
Lo, like a busy bee, without guile,	Lo, lyk a bisy bee, withouten gile,
That thou hast sown in Cecile, take to thee!	That thou hast sowe in Cecile, taak to thee!
"Sower of chaste counsel, shepherd of us all,	"Sower of chaast conseil, hierde of us alle,
"Almighty Lord, O Jesus Christ," said he,	"Almyghty Lord, O Jhesu Crist," quod he,
He let the tears fall from his eyes.	The teeris from his eyen leet he falle.
Urban for joy did hold up his hands.	Urban for joye his handes gan up holde.
Said his message; and when he told it,	Dide his message; and whan that he it tolde,
And he immediately without delay	And he anon withouten tariynge
In hiding among the saints' burial places.	Among the seintes buryeles lotynge.
He immediately found this holy old Urban	He foond this hooly olde Urban anon
And just as he was taught by his learning (from Cecilie),	And right as hym was taught by his lernynge,
Then you shall see that angel, ere you depart."	Thanne shul ye se that angel, er ye twynne."
And when he has cleansed you of sin (by baptism),	And whan that he hath purged yow fro synne,
Tell him the words which I told to you;	Telle hym the wordes whiche I to yow tolde;
And when you have beheld Saint Urban,	And whan that ye Seint Urban han biholde,
For secret needs and for a good purpose.	For secree nedes and for good entente.
To show you the good Urban the old,	To shewen yow the goode Urban the olde,
"Tell them that I, Cecile, sent you to them	"Telle hem that I, Cecile, yow to hem sente
Say to them exactly thus, which I shall tell you.	Sey hem right thus, as that I shal yow telle.
And to the poor folks that dwell there,	And to the povre folkes that ther dwelle,
Go forth to the Appian Way," said she,	Gooth forth to Via Apia," quod shee,
Provided that you believe in Christ and have yourself baptized.	So that ye trowe on Crist and yow baptize.
"If you wish, you shall see the angel,	"If that yow list, the angel shul ye see,
Cecile answered immediately in this manner:	Cecile answerde anon-right in this wise:
Then truly with this sword will I slay you both."	Right with this swerd thanne wol I sle yow bothe."
And if thou love another man, in truth	And if thou love another man, for sothe
Then will I do as thou hast prayed me;	Thanne wol I doon as thou hast prayed me;
And if it be a true angel,	And if that it a verray angel bee,
Let me see that angel and behold him;	Lat me that aungel se and hym biholde;
Valerian, corrected as God would (have it),	Valerian, corrected as God wolde,
And show you his joy and his brightness."	And shewen yow his joye and his brightnesse."
He will love you as (he loves) me, for your chastity,	He wol yow loven as me, for youre clennesse,
And if you preserve me in chaste love,	And if that ye in clene love me gye,
And in your youth thus you shall die;	And in youre yowthe thus ye shullen dye;
He straightway will slay you in the act,	He right anon wol sle yow with the dede,
That you touch me, or love me lecherously,	That ye me touche, or love in vileynye,
"And if he may sense, withoubt doubt,	"And if that he may feelen, out of drede,
Is always ready to guard my body.	Is redy ay my body for to kepe.
"I have an angel who loves me,	"I have an aungel which that loveth me,
And then for the first time to him thus said she:	And thanne at erst to hym thus seyde she:
He should never ever betray her;	He sholde nevere mo biwreyen here;
That for no occasion nor thing that might be,	That for no cas ne thyng that myghte be,
Valerian did earnestly unto her swear	Valerian gan faste unto hire swere
Providing that you swear you shall not reveal it."	So that ye swere ye shul it nat biwreye."
Which I am very eager to say to you,	Which that right fayn I wolde unto yow seye,
There is a secret, if you want to hear it,	Ther is a conseil, and ye wolde it heere,
"O sweet and well beloved spouse dear,	"O sweete and wel biloved spouse deere,
With her husband, as often is the manner,	With hire housbonde, as ofte is the manere,
The night came, and to bed must she go	The nyght cam, and to bedde moste she gon
Ever praying in her prayers very earnestly.	Ay biddynge in hire orisons ful faste.
Every second and third day she fasted,	Every seconde and thridde day she faste,
And for his love who died upon the cross	And for his love that dyde upon a tree
Immaculate, lest that I be damned."	Unwemmed, lest that I confounded be."
"O Lord, my soul and also my body preserve	"O Lord, my soule and eek my body gye
To God alone in heart thus sang she:	To God allone in herte thus sang she:
And while the organs made melody,	And whil the organs maden melodie,
Under her robe of gold, that became her very well,	Under hir robe of gold, that sat ful faire,
She, very devout and humble in her spirit,	She, ful devout and humble in hir corage,
And the day of her marriage was come,	And day was comen of hir marriage,
Who was called Valerian,	Which that ycleped was Valerian,
Wedded be, who was very young of age,	Ywedded be, that was ful yong of age,
And when this maiden should unto a man	And whan this mayden sholde unto a man
Beseeching him to preserve her virginity.	Bisekynge hym to kepe hir maydenhede.
Of her prayer and God to love and dread,	Of hir preyere and God to love and drede,
She never ceased, as I written find,	She nevere cessed, as I writen fynde,
And from her cradle nurtured up in the faith	And from hir cradel up fostred in the feith
Was descended from Romans and of noble birth,	Was comen of Romayns and of noble kynde,
This bright maiden Cecilie, as her Life says,	This mayden bright Cecilie, as hir lif seith,
Now have I declared to you what she was called.	Now have I yow declared what she highte.
And burning ever in very bright charity.	And brennynge evere in charite ful brighte.
And round and whole in persevering in good (works),	And round and hool in good perseverynge,
Very swift and busy ever in good works,	Ful swift and bisy evere in good werkynge,
Just so was fair Cecilie the white	Right so was faire Cecilie the white
That heaven is swift and round and also burning,	That hevene is swift and round and eek brennynge,
And various works, bright because of their excellence.	And sondry werkes, brighte of excellence.
And also the complete clarity of wisdom,	And eek the cleernesse hool of sapience,
See the greatness of spirit of faith,	Seyen of feith the magnanymytee,
Just so in this maiden men spiritually	Right so men goostly in this mayden free
The sun and moon and stars in every direction,	The sonne and moone and sterres every weye,
And just as men may in the heaven see	And right as men may in the hevene see
For "leos" in English means "people,"	For "leos" "peple" in Englissh is to seye,
Exemplar of all good and wise works.	Ensample of goode and wise werkes alle.
Men could well call her "the heaven of people,"	Men myghte hire wel "the hevene of peple" calle,
Or else, lo, this maidens bright name	Or elles, loo, this maydens name bright
Of wisdom and for her pure morals;	Of sapience and for hire thewes cleere;
"Lack of blindness," for her great light	"Wantynge of blyndnesse," for hir grete light
Cecile may also be explained in this manner,	Cecile may eek be seyd in this manere,
And "Leah" for her constant business.	And "Lia" for hire lastynge bisynesse.
The "heaven" is set for her holiness of thought,	The "hevene" is set for thoght of hoolynesse,
Of "heaven" and "Leah"; and here, symbolically,	Of "hevene" and "Lia"; and heere, in figurynge,
Is joined, by a sort of combination	Is joyned, by a manere conjoynynge
Or else Cecile, as I written find,	Or elles Cecile, as I writen fynde,
Or Cecilie is to mean "the way for the blind,"	Or Cecilie is to seye "the wey to blynde,"
The sweet smell, "lily" was her name.	The soote savour, "lilie" was hir name.
And green because of conscience and of good reputation	And grene of conscience, and of good fame
Or, because she had whiteness because of chastity,	Or, for she whitnesse hadde of honestee,
For pure chastity of virginity;	For pure chaastnesse of virginitee;
It is to say in English "heaven's lily,"	It is to seye in Englissh "hevenes lilie,"
Explain, as one can see in her story.	Expowne, as men may in hir storie see.
First the name of Saint Cecilie I would to you	First wolde I yow the name of Seint Cecilie
And pray you that you will correct (any errors in) my work.	And pray yow that ye wole my werk amende.
Of him who out of reverence for the saint	Of hym that at the seintes reverence
For I have both the words and the meaning	For bothe have I the wordes and sentence
To narrate this same story elaborately,	This ilke storie subtilly to endite,
Forgive me that I make no effort	Foryeve me that I do no diligence
Yet I pray you who read what I write,	Yet preye I yow that reden that I write,
Now help, for to my work I will address myself.	Now help, for to my werk I wol me dresse.
Of those who are in sorrow and in distress,	Of hem that been in sorwe and in distresse,
O haven of refuge, O salvation	O havene of refut, O salvacioun
Of earthly lust and false desires;	Of erthely lust and fals affeccioun;
That is troubled by the contamination	That troubled is by the contagioun
And of thy light enlighten in prison my soul,	And of thy light my soule in prison lighte,
Thou Christ's mother, daughter dear of Anne!	Thow Cristes mooder, doghter deere of Anne!
Where unceasingly is sung "Hosanna,"	Theras withouten ende is songe "Osanne,"
Be my advocate in that high place	Be myn advocat in that heighe place
O thou, that art so fair and full of grace,	O thou, that art so fair and ful of grace,
That I may be free from that place that is most dark!	That I be quit fro thennes that most derk is!
Give me wit and opportunity to work so,	So for to werken yif me wit and space,
And, because faith is dead without works,	And, for that feith is deed withouten werkis,
And though that I, unworthy son of Eve,	And though that I, unworthy sone of Eve,
That from their lord's table are fallen;	That from hir lordes table been yfalle;
That dogs eat some of all the crumbs	That whelpes eten somme of the crommes alle
Think on the Cananite woman, who said	Thynk on the womman Cananee, that sayde
Me, banished exile, in this desert of bitterness;	Me, flemed wrecche, in this desert of galle;
Now, thou meek and blissful fair maid help	Now help, thow meeke and blisful faire mayde,
Thou goest before and art their lives' physician.	Thou goost biforn and art hir lyves leche.
Very willingly, before men beseech thine help,	Ful frely, er that men thyn help biseche,
But often of thy goodness	But often tyme of thy benygnytee
That thou, who art the sun of excellence	That thou, that art the sonne of excellence
With mercy, goodness, and with such pity	With mercy, goodnesse, and with swich pitee
Magnificence is in thee combined	Assembled is in thee magnificence
The Creator of every creature.	The Creatour of every creature.
Bore in thy body -- and remained maiden pure --	Baar of thy body -- and dweltest mayden pure --
Ever praise; and thou, Virgin without blemish,	Ay heryen; and thou, Virgine wemmelees,
Whom earth and sea and heaven unceasing	Whom erthe and see and hevene out of relees
He who is lord and guide of the threefold universe,	That of the tryne compas lord and gyde is,
The eternal love and peace took man's shape,	Took mannes shap the eterneel love and pees,
To clothe and wrap His Son in blood and flesh.	His Sone in blood and flessh to clothe and wynde.
That the Maker of humankind had no disdain	That no desdeyn the Makere hadde of kynde
Thou so greatly enobled our nature,	Thow nobledest so ferforth oure nature,
Thou humble, and high over every creature,	Thow humble, and heigh over every creature,
In whom God for goodness chose to dwell,	In whom that God for bountee chees to wone,
Thou well of mercy, sinful souls' cure,	Thow welle of mercy, synful soules cure,
Thou Maid and Mother, daughter of thy Son,	Thow Mayde and Mooder, doghter of thy Sone,
As one may hereafter read in her story.	As man may after reden in hire storie.
The eternal life and victory over the fiend,	The eterneel lyf and of the feend victorie,
Thou comfort of us wretches, let me narrate	Thou confort of us wrecches, do me endite
To thee at my beginning first I call;	To thee at my bigynnyng first I calle;
Of whom it so well pleased Bernard to write,	Of whom that Bernard list so wel to write,
And thou who art the flower of all virgins,	And thow that flour of virgines art alle,
I mean thee, maid and martyr, Saint Cecilie.	Thee meene I, mayde and martyr, Seint Cecilie.
Thou with thy garland made with rose and lily --	Thou with thy gerland wroght with rose and lilie --
Correctly of thy glorious life and suffering,	Right of thy glorious lif and passioun,
In translating the legend	After the legende in translacioun
I have here done my faithful efforts	I have heer doon my feithful bisynesse
And in order to set us apart from such idleness,	And for to putte us fro swich ydelnesse,
And to devour all that others earn by working,	And to devouren al that othere swynke,
(Allowing her) only to sleep, and to eat and drink,	Oonly to slepe, and for to ete and drynke,
And since sloth holds her (Idleness) on a leash	And syn that slouthe hire holdeth in a lees
From which there never comes any good or profit;	Of which ther nevere comth no good n' encrees;
That idleness is rotten laziness,	That ydelnesse is roten slogardye,
Yet they can well see by reason, doubtless,	Yet seen men wel by resoun, doutelees,
And even though people never dreaded to die,	And though men dradden nevere for to dye,
Well ought we to work and resist idleness.	Wel oghte us werche and ydelnesse withstonde.
That until a man is seized right by the hem of his garment,	Til that a man be hent right by the lappe,
He can catch him in his trap so quickly,	He kan so lightly cache hym in his trappe,
When he can espy a man in idleness,	Whan he may man in ydelnesse espye,
Continually lies in wait to seize us suddenly,	Continuelly us waiteth to biclappe,
For he that with his thousand sly snares	For he that with his thousand cordes slye
Lest the fiend by means of idleness seize us.	Lest that the feend thurgh ydelnesse us hente.
Well ought we to do all our diligence	Wel oghten we to doon al oure entente,
That is to say, by keeping busy in lawful good works --	That is to seyn, by leveful bisynesse --
To shun, and by her contrary to overcome her --	To eschue, and by hire contrarie hire oppresse --
Which men call in English Idleness,	Which that men clepe in Englissh Ydelnesse,
The minister and the nurse of vices,	The ministre and the norice unto vices,
"Gladly," said she, and said as you shall hear.	"Gladly," quod she, and seyde as ye shal heere.
Now will you grant this, my lady dear?"	Now wol ye vouche sauf, my lady deere?"
A tale next, if it so were that you would.	A tale next, if so were that ye wolde.
I would judge that you should tell	I wolde demen that ye tellen sholde
If I knew I should not grieve you,	So that I wiste I sholde yow nat greve,
"My Lady Prioress, by your leave,	"My lady Prioresse, by youre leve,
As courteously as if he had been a maiden,	As curteisly as it had been a mayde,
Who shall now, first of all this company, tell	Who shal now telle first of al this route
"But now pass over that, and let us look around to see	"But now passe over, and lat us seke aboute,
Invite no more monks into your dwelling.	Draweth no monkes moore unto youre in.
And of his wife as well, by Saint Augustine!	And in his wyves eek, by Seint Austyn!
The monk made a monkey of the man,	The monk putte in the mannes hood an ape,
A ha! Fellows, beware of such a trick!	A ha! Felawes, beth ware of swich a jape!
God give the monk a thousand cartloads of bad years!	God yeve the monk a thousand last quade yeer!
Sir gentle master, gentle mariner!	Sire gentil maister, gentil maryneer!
"Now long may thou sail by the coast,	"Now longe moote thou saille by the cost,
And hasten you, and go your way quickly."	And hasteth yow, and gooth youre wey anon."
Tell your grief, lest that he come down;	Telleth youre grief, lest that he come adoun;
This I swear to you on my religious vows.	This swere I yow on my professioun.
Above all women, certainly.	Aboven alle wommen, sikerly.
With you, whom I have loved especially	Of yow, which I have loved specially
To have the more opportunity of acquaintance	To have the moore cause of aqueyntaunce
I call him so, by Saint Denis of France,	I clepe hym so, by Seint Denys of Fraunce,
Than is this leaf that hangs on the tree!	Than is this leef that hangeth on the tree!
He is no more cousin unto me	He is na moore cosyn unto me
Because of my husband, although he is your cousin."	With myn housbonde, al be he youre cosyn."
What I have suffered since I was a wife	What I have suffred sith I was a wyf
Then would I tell a legend of my life,	Thanne wolde I telle a legende of my lyf,
As I have none, and especially in this place,	As I have noon, and namely in this place,
"Cousin," she said, "if I had a space of time,	"Cosyn," quod she, "if that I hadde a space,
And each of them told the other what they pleased.	And ech of hem tolde oother what hem liste.
Thus they are sworn, and thereupon they kissed,	Thus been they sworn, and heerupon they kiste,
But truly for love and trust."	But verraily for love and affiance."
Not for any kinship nor alliance,	Nat for no cosynage ne alliance,
I shall never, even though I go to hell for it,	Ne shal I nevere, for to goon to helle,
Though men would tear me all to pieces	Though men me wolde al into pieces tere,
By God and by this prayer book I swear,	By God and by this portehors I swere,
"The same in reply to you," she said, "I say.	"The same agayn to yow," quod she, "I seye.
Shall I betray any of your secrets."	Ne shal I of no conseil yow biwreye."
That never in my life, willing or unwilling,	That nevere in my lyf, for lief ne looth,
For on my prayer book I make an oath	For on my portehors I make an ooth
All your trouble, for it shall be secret.	Al youre anoy, for it shal been secree.
Advise or help; and therefore tell me	Conseille or helpe; and therfore telleth me
Should destroy yourself; but tell me your grief.	Fordo youreself; but telleth me youre grief.
That you, for any sorrow or any dread,	That ye, for any sorwe or any drede,
And said, "Alas, my niece, God forbid	And seyde, "Allas, my nece, God forbede
This monk began to stare upon this wife,	This monk bigan upon this wyf to stare,
I am so full of dread and also of care."	So ful am I of drede and eek of care."
Or else to make an end of myself,	Or elles of myself to make an ende,
Therefore I intend to go out of this land,	Wherfore I thynke out of this land to wende,
"Dare I tell how it stands with me.	"Dar I nat telle how that it stant with me.
That I was born,' but to no one," she said,	That I was born,' but to no wight," quod she,
That has less desire for that sorry play.	That lasse lust hath to that sory pley.
In all the realm of France there is no wife	In al the reawme of France is ther no wyf
For, by that God that gave me soul and life,	For, by that God that yaf me soule and lyf,
"Nay, my cousin, it stands not so with me;	"Nay, cosyn myn, it stant nat so with me;
And said thus, "Yea, God knows all," she said.	And seyde thus, "Ye, God woot al," quod she.
This fair wife began to shake her head	This faire wyf gan for to shake hir heed
And of his own thought he grew all red.	And of his owene thought he wax al reed.
And with that word he laughed very merrily,	And with that word he lough ful murily,
So much that you badly have need to rest."	That yow were nede to resten hastily."
I believe, certainly, that the head of our household	I trowe, certes, that oure goode man
But dear niece, why are you so pale?	But deere nece, why be ye so pale?
Which is greatly distressed by hounds great and small.	Were al forstraught with houndes grete and smale.
As in his lair sits a weary hare,	As in a fourme sit a wery hare,
As are these wedded men, that lie and doze	As been thise wedded men, that lye and dare
Unless it were for an old enfeebled creature,	But it were for an old appalled wight,
To sleep five hours upon a night,	Fyve houres for to slepe upon a nyght,
"Niece," said he, "it ought enough suffice	"Nece," quod he, "it oghte ynough suffise
"What ails you to rise so early?"	"What eyleth yow so rathe for to ryse?"
For the maid was yet subject to adult discipline.	For yet under the yerde was the mayde.
Whom she may govern and guide as she pleases,	Which as hir list she may governe and gye,
A maid servant came in her company,	A mayde child cam in hire compaignye,
And salutes him, as she has often done.	And hym saleweth, as she hath doon ofte.
Into the garden, where he walks quietly,	Into the gardyn, there he walketh softe,
This good wife came walking alone	This goode wyf cam walkynge pryvely
And has said his prayers very courteously.	And hath his thynges seyd ful curteisly.
And in the garden walks to and fro,	And in the gardyn walketh to and fro,
Don John had also risen in the morning,	Daun John was rysen in the morwe also,
From (making) his accounts, for the time being;	Of his acountes, for the meene tyme;
And also he wanted that no one should hinder him	And eek he nolde that no man sholde hym lette
For which he very tightly shut his counting house-door;	For which ful faste his countour-dore he shette;
His treasure and his hoard was very rich,	Ful riche was his tresor and his hord,
He lays before him on his counting-board.	He leith biforn hym on his countyng-bord.
His account books and his moneybags many a one	His bookes and his bagges many oon
And if he had profited or not.	And if that he encressed were or noon.
And how he had spent his funds,	And how that he despended hadde his good,
Of that same year how it stood with him,	Of thilke yeer how that it with hym stood,
And he goes up into his counting-house	And up into his countour-hous gooth he
And seriously considers his business,	And on his nedes sadly hym avyseth,
The third day, this merchant up arises,	The thridde day, this marchant up ariseth,
This merchant and this monk, for a day or two.	This marchant and this monk, a day or tweye.
And thus I let them eat and drink and amuse themselves,	And thus I lete hem ete and drynke and pleye,
And game fowls, as always was his custom.	And volatyl, as ay was his usage.
And also another full of fine white wine,	And eek another ful of fyn vernage,
With him he brought a jug of malmsey wine,	With hym broghte he a jubbe of malvesye,
Our dear cousin, full of courtesy?	Oure deere cosyn, ful of curteisye?
And he comes quickly to Seint-Denis.	And unto Seint-Denys he comth anon.
To see to their granges and their capacious barns,	To seen hir graunges and hire bernes wyde,
And also an officer, to ride out	And eek an officer, out for to ryde,
Because he was a man of great prudence	By cause he was a man of heigh prudence
Has of his abbot, as he pleases, permission,	Hath of his abbot, as hym list, licence,
This noble monk, of whom I tell you,	This noble monk, of which I yow devyse,
Before he went to Bruges, indeed.	Er he to Brugges wente, in alle wise.
With him and with his wife a day or two,	With hym and with his wyf a day or tweye,
That he should come to Seint-Denis to visit	That he sholde come to Seint-Denys to pleye
For which he has to Paris sent immediately	For which he hath to Parys sent anon
To buy there a quantity of merchandise;	To byen there a porcioun of ware;
To travel to the town of Bruges ,	Toward the toun of Brugges for to fare,
Decided to make ready his preparations	Shoop hym to make redy his array
But as it happened, this merchant on a day	But so bifel, this marchant on a day
No more of this for now, for it suffices.	Na moore of this as now, for it suffiseth.
As a fowl is happy when the sun rises up.	As fowel is fayn whan that the sonne up riseth.
For which they were as glad of his coming	For which they were as glad of his comyng
When he came, some sort of suitable gift,	Whan that he cam, som manere honest thyng,
In all that house; but according to their rank,	In al that hous; but after hir degree,
He did not forget to give to the lowest ranking servant	He noght forgat to yeve the leeste page
To do pleasure, and also great expenditure.	To doon plesaunce, and also greet costage.
In that house, and full of diligence	As in that hous, and ful of diligence
Free-handed was Don John, and generous in spending	Free was daun John, and manly of dispence,
Of brotherhood while their life may endure.	Of bretherhede whil that hir lyf may dure.
And each of them assured the other	And ech of hem gan oother for t' assure
Thus are they knit with eternal alliance,	Thus been they knyt with eterne alliaunce,
For to his heart it was a great pleasure.	For to his herte it was a greet plesaunce.
And he does the same; he not once says 'nay,'	And he agayn; he seith nat ones nay,
The monk claims him as a kinsman,	The monk hym claymeth as for cosynage,
The two of them, were both born in one village,	Were bothe two yborn in o village,
And also this monk of whom I began (to tell),	And eek this monk of which that I bigan,
And in view of the fact that this good man,	And for as muchel as this goode man,
As it is possible for any friend to be.	As it is possible any freend to be.
That in his house as intimate was he	That in his hous as famulier was he
Since their first acquaintance began,	Sith that hir firste knoweliche bigan,
Was so acquainted with the good man,	Aqueynted was so with the goode man,
Who continually was drawing to that place.	That evere in oon was drawynge to that place.
I believe he was about thirty years old --	I trowe a thritty wynter he was oold --
There was a monk, a handsome man and a bold one --	Ther was a monk, a fair man and a boold --
Among all his guests, high ranking and low,	Amonges alle his gestes, grete and smale,
That it is a wonder; but listen to my tale.	That wonder is; but herkneth to my tale.
Because of his generosity, and because his wife was fair,	For his largesse, and for his wyf was fair,
For which he always had so many guests	For which he hadde alday so greet repair
This noble merchant held a worthy house,	This noble marchaunt heeld a worthy hous,
Or lend us gold, and that is perilous.	Or lene us gold, and that is perilous.
But thinks it is wasted and lost,	But thynketh it is wasted and ylost,
Or else desires to endure no such expense,	Or ellis list no swich dispence endure,
And if it happens he can not pay,	And if that he noght may, par aventure,
In which finery we dance merrily.	In which array we daunce jolily.
Richly, all for the sake of his own reputation,	Al for his owene worshipe richely,
He must clothe us, and he must adorn us	He moot us clothe, and he moot us arraye,
The poor (hapless) husband, always he must pay,	The sely housbonde, algate he moot paye,
But woe to him that must pay for all!	But wo is hym that payen moot for al!
Pass away as does a shadow upon the wall;	Passen as dooth a shadwe upon the wal;
That men do to them at festivities and at dances.	That men hem doon at festes and at daunces.
Than is worth all the good cheer and reverence	Than worth is al the chiere and reverence
Which is a thing that causes more expense	Which is a thyng that causeth more dispence
And she was sociable and fond of revelry,	And compaignable and revelous was she,
He had a wife of excellent beauty;	A wyf he hadde of excellent beautee;
Who was rich, for which men considered him wise.	That riche was, for which men helde hym wys.
A merchant once dwelled at Seint-Denis,	A marchant whilom dwelled at Seint-Denys,
Here begins the Shipman's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Shipmannes Tale.
Then I will know well that it is good enough."	Thanne woot I wel that it is good ynow."
So far as my mental abilities will suffice.	As fer as that my wittes wol suffyse.
I will not offend you in any way	I wol yow nat contrarien in no wyse
Unto your will; now hearken what I say.	Unto your wyl; now herkneth what I seye.
"Gladly, sir Host," said he, "I will obey	"Gladly, sire Hoost," quod he, "I wole obeye
"Tell on thy tale without more words."	"Telle on thy tale withouten wordes mo."
Though to this man I speak a word or two."	Though to this man I speke a word or two."
"I pray you, hold me not in disdain,	"I prey yow, haveth me nat in desdeyn,
"That know I well, sir," said the Franklin.	"That knowe I wel, sire," quod the Frankeleyn.
A tale or two, or break his promise."	A tale or two, or breken his biheste."
"What, Franklin! By God, sir, well thou knowest	"What, Frankeleyn! Pardee, sire, wel thou woost
"Straw for your nobility!" said our Host.	"Straw for youre gentillesse!" quod oure Hoost.
From whom he might learn true nobility."	Where he myghte lerne gentillesse aright."
Than converse with any noble person	Than to comune with any gentil wight
And he would rather talk with a serving boy	And he hath levere talken with a page
And lose all that he has is his usage.	And lese al that he hath is his usage.
But to play at dice, and to spend	But for to pleye at dees, and to despende
Because he has no desire to devote himself to virtue;	For he to vertu listeth nat entende;
I have rebuked my son, and shall again,	I have my sone snybbed, and yet shal,
As you are! Fie on possessions,	As that ye been! Fy on possessioun,
That he were a man of such discretion	He were a man of swich discrecioun
Though it right now were fallen in my hand,	Though it right now were fallen in myn hond,
I had rather than have twenty pound's worth of land,	I hadde levere than twenty pound worth lond,
I have a son, and by the Trinity,	I have a sone, and by the Trinitee,
For I take great pleasure in thy speech.	For of thy speche I have greet deyntee.
And in virtue send thee perseverance,	And in vertu sende thee continuaunce,
If thou live; God give thee good luck,	If that thou lyve; God yeve thee good chaunce,
That shall be thy equal in eloquence,	Of eloquence that shal be thy peere,
With such feeling thou speakest, sir, I praise thee!	So feelyngly thou spekest, sire, I allow the!
Said the Franklin, "considering thy youth,	Quod the Frankeleyn, "considerynge thy yowthe,
And nobly. I praise well thy intelligence,"	And gentilly. I preise wel thy wit,"
"In faith, Squire, thou hast well acquitted thyself.	"In feith, Squier, thow hast thee wel yquit
To that house of the god Mercury, the sly --	Til that the god Mercurius hous, the slye --
Appollo whirls up his chariot so high	Appollo whirleth up his chaar so hye
And where I left off I will again begin.	And ther I lefte I wol ayeyn bigynne.
For Canacee ere he could win her.	For Canacee er that he myghte hire wynne.
That fought in lists with the brethren two	That faught in lystes with the bretheren two
Had he not been helped by the steed of brass;	Ne hadde he ben holpen by the steede of bras;
For whom full often in great peril he was,	For whom ful ofte in greet peril he was,
How he won Theodora to his wife,	How that he wan Theodora to his wif,
And after I will speak of Algarsif,	And after wol I speke of Algarsif,
That in his time many a city won;	That in his tyme many a citee wan;
First will I tell you of Cambyuskan,	First wol I telle yow of Cambyuskan,
That never yet were heard such great marvels.	That nevere yet was herd so grete mervailles.
To speak of adventures and of battles	To speken of aventures and of batailles
But henceforth I will keep to my narrative	But hennesforth I wol my proces holde
By the mediation of Cambalus,	By mediacion of Cambalus,
Repentant, as the story tells us,	Repentant, as the storie telleth us,
How this falcon got back her love,	How that this faucon gat hire love ageyn
Until it becomes again appropriate to tell	Til it come eft to purpos for to seyn
I will for now speak no more of her ring	I wol namoore as now speke of hir ryng
Thus I leave Canacee keeping her hawk;	Thus lete I Canacee hir hauk kepyng;
Magpies, to cry out against them and chide them.	Pyes, on hem for to crie and chyde.
For sheer scorn were painted beside them,	Right for despit were peynted hem bisyde,
Such as are these small birds, falcons, and owls;	As ben thise tidyves, tercelettes, and owles;
And on all the outside, the pen is painted green,	And al withoute, the mewe is peynted grene,
As a sign of truth that is in women seen.	In signe of trouthe that is in wommen sene.
And covered it with velvet cloths, blue	And covered it with veluettes blewe,
And by her bed's head she made a pen	And by hire beddes heed she made a mewe
She devotes her efforts and all her power,	She dooth hire bisynesse and al hire myght,
With which to heal this hawk. From dawn to nighttime	To heelen with this hauk. Fro day to nyght
Of herbs, precious and delicate in color,	Of herbes preciouse and fyne of hewe
Out of the ground, and make new salves	Out of the ground, and make salves newe
Now Canacee can do nothing but dig herbs	Now kan nat Canacee but herbes delve
And softly did wrap her in bandages,	And softely in plastres gan hire wrappe,
But Canacee carries her home enfolded in her gown,	But Canacee hom bereth hire in hir lappe,
They knew not how they might cheer up the falcon.	They nyste hou they myghte the faucon glade.
That Canacee and all her women made;	That Canacee and alle hir wommen made;
Great was the sorrow for the hawk's harm	Greet was the sorwe for the haukes harm
And swooned again in Canacee's lap.	And swowned eft in Canacees barm.
And with that word this falcon did cry out	And with that word this faucon gan to crie
And I am lost, without remedy!"	And I am lorn withouten remedie!"
Thus has the kite my lover in her service,	Thus hath the kyte my love in hire servyse,
That all his love is completely gone from me,	That al his love is clene fro me ago,
And suddenly he so loved this kite	And sodeynly he loved this kyte so
He saw upon a time a kite (scavenger bird) fly by,	He saugh upon a tyme a kyte flee,
And goodly to look upon and humble and generous,	And goodlich for to seen, and humble and free,
Though he was of noble birth, and fresh and gay,	Though he were gentil born, and fressh and gay,
"So fared this falcon, alas the day!	"So ferde this tercelet, allas the day!
No nobility of blood can restrain them.	No gentillesse of blood ne may hem bynde.
And love novelties because of their nature,	And loven novelries of propre kynde,
They are so fond of novelty in their food,	So newefangel been they of hire mete,
He with his feet will kick down his cup,	He with his feet wol spurne adoun his cuppe,
Yet just as soon as his door is left open	Yet right anon as that his dore is uppe
And give them sugar, honey, bread and milk,	And yeve hem sugre, hony, breed and milk,
And strew their cages with straw fair and soft as silk,	And strawe hir cage faire and softe as silk,
For though thou take care of them night and day,	For though thou nyght and day take of hem hede,
As do birds that men feed in cages.	As briddes doon that men in cages fede.
Men, because of their nature, love novelty,	Men loven of propre kynde newefangelnesse,
Makes himself happy;' thus say men, as I suppose.	Gladeth hymself;' thus seyn men, as I gesse.
That `every thing, by returning to its natural state,	That `alle thyng, repeirynge to his kynde,
When he decided to rest,	Whan it cam hym to purpos for to reste,
And forth he speeds until he came where he pleased.	And forth he fleeth til he cam ther hym leste.
So at the last he had to go forth on his way,	So atte laste he moste forth his weye,
Who shall eat with a fiend,' thus I have heard said.	That shal ete with a feend,' thus herde I seye.
`Therefore she must have a very long spoon	`Therfore bihoveth hire a ful long spoon
When he has said everything well, then he has done (all he will do).	Whan he hath al wel seyd, thanne hath he doon.
Who can speak better than he, who can act worse?	Who kan sey bet than he, who kan do werse?
What he answered, it needs not be repeated;	What he answerde, it nedeth noght reherce;
Be to me such as I to you have been and shall be.'	Beth swich as I to yow have been and shal.'
And took him by the hand, with Saint John as my guarantor,	And took hym by the hond, Seint John to borwe,
As I best could, I hid from him my sorrow,	As I best myghte, I hidde fro hym my sorwe,
And took it well, since it had to be.	And took it wel, syn that it moste be.
So that I made virtue of necessity,	That I made vertu of necessitee,
For his honor, as often it happens so,	For his honour, as ofte it happeth so,
And it was reasonable also that he must go	And resoun wolde eek that he moste go
Within a little while, to say the truth;	Withinne a litel while, sooth to seyn;
And also that he should return again	And eek that he repaire sholde ageyn
But nevertheless, I thought he was so true,	But nathelees, I thoughte he was so trewe,
That he had felt as much harm as I,	That he had felt as muche harm as I,
So sorrowfully also that I believed truly	So sorwefully eek that I wende verraily
So one day he took his leave of me,	So on a day of me he took his leve,
Such harm I felt because he could not remain.	Swich harm I felte for he ne myghte bileve.
By this experience I know what is the pain of death;	I knowe what is the peyne of deeth therby;
For one thing I dare tell boldly:	For o thyng dar I tellen boldely:
I can not make a description of it.	I kan nat make of it discripsioun.
Whether I was woeful, there is no question;	Wher me was wo, that is no questioun;
Out of that place where I was.	Out of that place which that I was inne.
But finally, thus at the last it stood,	But finally, thus atte laste it stood,
That I supposed of him nothing but good.	That I supposed of hym noght but good.
"This lasted longer than a year or two,	"This laste lenger than a yeer or two,
As him, God knows, nor never shall again.	As hym, God woot, ne nevere shal namo.
Nor never loved anyone more, or even as much	Ne nevere hadde I thyng so lief, ne levere,
Keeping ever the limits set by my honor.	Kepynge the boundes of my worshipe evere.
In all things, so far as was consonant with reason,	In alle thyng, as fer as reson fil,
This is to say, my will obeyed his will	This is to seyn, my wyl obeyed his wyl
That my will was his will's instrument;	That my wyl was his willes instrument;
It seemed to me I felt death twist my heart.	Me thoughte I felte deeth myn herte twiste.
Although it were never so little, and I knew of it,	Al were it never so lite, and I it wiste,
That if it so were that any thing pained him,	That if so were that any thyng hym smerte,
And for the truth I believed was in his heart,	And for the trouthe I demed in his herte,
And I so loved him for his obeisance,	And I so loved hym for his obeisaunce,
Both his words and his countenance.	As wel his wordes as his contenaunce.
So painted he and made himself elegant in every way,	So peynted he and kembde at point-devys
For any woman, were she never so wise,	Til any womman, were she never so wys,
His manner was a heaven to see	His manere was an hevene for to see
Where duplicity or feigning were concerned,	Ther doublenesse or feynyng sholde approche,
Nor were worthy to unbuckle his galosh,	Ne were worthy unbokelen his galoche,
Reproduce the deceptive sophisms of his art,	Countrefete the sophymes of his art,
Could (any) man, by (so much as) one twenty thousandth,	Ne koude man, by twenty thousand part,
Nor ever, since the first man was born,	Ne nevere, syn the firste man was born,
To love two, as folk wrote long ago --	To loven two, as writen folk biforn --
Since Lameth was, he who first of all began	Syn Lameth was, that alderfirst bigan
Jason? certainly, nor any other man	Jason? certes, ne noon oother man
That never Jason nor Paris of Troy --	That nevere Jason ne Parys of Troye --
So like a gentle lover in his manners,	So lyk a gentil lovere of manere,
With such high reverence, and, as seemed by his appearance,	With so heigh reverence, and, as by his cheere,
Fell on his knees with such devout humility,	Fil on his knees with so devout humblesse,
Immediately this tiger, full of treachery,	Anon this tigre, ful of doublenesse,
As he swore he gave his heart to me,	As he swoor he yaf his herte to me,
And gave him my true heart as freely	And yeven hym my trewe herte as free
In such a manner as I have said above,	In swich a gyse as I have seyd above,
That I had granted him fully my love	That I hadde graunted hym fully my love
And when he saw the business so far advanced	And whan he saugh the thyng so fer ygoon
But truly it is said, since many a day gone by,	But sooth is seyd, goon sithen many a day,
And took his heart in exchange for mine for ever.	And took his herte in chaunge of myn for ay.
God knows and he, I would not have agreed on any other terms --	God woot and he, that ootherwise noght --
I gave him all my heart and all my thought --	I yaf hym al myn herte and al my thoght --
This is to say, that according to his deserts,	This is to seyn, that after his desert,
Were safe, both in private and in public (in all ways);	Were saved, bothe privee and apert;
That evermore my honor and renown	That everemoore myn honour and renoun
Granted him love, upon this condition,	Graunted hym love, upon this condicioun,
Upon receiving his oaths and his pledges,	Upon his othes and his seuretee,
Entirely ignorant of his consummate malice,	Al innocent of his crouned malice,
Until my heart, too compassionate and too naive,	Til that myn herte, to pitous and to nyce,
And many a year his service to me feigned,	And many a yeer his service to me feyned,
Until he so long had wept and complained,	Til he so longe hadde wopen and compleyned,
So that, except for the fiend, no one knew what he meant,	That, save the feend, noon wiste what he mente,
And in this manner he served his own purpose	And in this wise he served his entente
Such was this hypocrite, in every circumstance.	Swich was this ypocrite, bothe coold and hoot.
And under is the corpse, as you know,	And under is the corps, swich as ye woot,
As in a tomb all the beauty is above,	As in a toumbe is al the faire above,
And keeps in outward appearance all his observances	And kepeth in semblaunt alle his observaunces
So does his ceremonies and obeisances,	Dooth so his cerymonyes and obeisaunces,
Just so this god of love's hypocrite	Right so this god of loves ypocryte
Until he can see his time to bite,	Til he may seen his tyme for to byte,
Just as a serpent hides himself under flowers	Right as a serpent hit hym under floures
So deeply in a fast dye he dyed his true colors.	So depe in greyn he dyed his coloures.
That no creature could have supposed he could feign,	That no wight koude han wend he koude feyne,
Under pleasantness, and under careful attentiveness,	Under plesance, and under bisy peyne,
And under the appearance of truth in such a manner,	And under hewe of trouthe in swich manere,
Although he was full of treason and falseness,	Al were he ful of treson and falsnesse,
That seemed an exemplar of all nobility;	That semed welle of alle gentillesse;
Then dwelt a male falcon very near me,	Tho dwelte a tercelet me faste by,
Until I could fly full high under the sky.	Til I koude flee ful hye under the sky.
I knew not what was adversity	I nyste nat what was adversitee
So tenderly that no thing ailed me,	So tendrely that no thyng eyled me,
And fostered on a cliff of marble gray	And fostred in a roche of marbul gray
"Where I was bred -- alas, that same day! --	"Ther I was bred -- allas, that ilke day! --
And, with a sigh, right thus she spoke her mind:	And, with a syk, right thus she seyde hir wille:
That other wept as she would turn to water	That oother weep as she to water wolde
And ever, while that one her sorrow told,	And evere, whil that oon hir sorwe tolde,
My harm I will reveal ere I go away."	Myn harm I wol confessen er I pace."
While that I have the time and the opportunity,	Whil that I have a leyser and a space,
Right for that cause and to that conclusion,	Right for that cause and that conclusion,
As by the whelp chastised is the lion,	As by the whelp chasted is the leon,
And to make others be warned by my example,	And for to maken othere be war by me,
But to obey unto your heart noble,	But for to obeye unto youre herte free,
But for no hope to fare the better,	But for noon hope for to fare the bet,
Out of true womanly goodness	Of verray wommanly benignytee
Compassion, my faire Canacee,	Compassion, my faire Canacee,
I see well that you have of my distress	I se wel that ye han of my distresse
For a gentle heart makes known its noble character.	For gentil herte kitheth gentillesse.
As well by deeds as by written authority;	As wel by werk as by auctoritee;
Is proven every day, as men may it see,	Is preved alday, as men may it see,
Feeling its counterpart in sharp pains,	Feelynge his similitude in peynes smerte,
"That pity runs soon in a gentle heart,	"That pitee renneth soone in gentil herte,
Right in her hawk's language thus she said:	Right in hir haukes ledene thus she seyde:
Until the time she awoke from the swoon.	Unto the tyme she gan of swough awake.
Until Canacee has in her lap her taken	Til Canacee hath in hire lappe hire take
And lies in a swoon, dead and like a stone,	And lith aswowne, deed and lyk a stoon,
Than ever she did, and fell to ground straightway,	Than ever she dide, and fil to grounde anon,
Then shrieked this falcon yet more pitifully	Tho shrighte this faucon yet moore pitously
With which to heal your hurts quickly."	To heel with youre hurtes hastily."
And herbs shall I in abundance find	And herbes shal I right ynowe yfynde
So help me great God of nature!	As wisly helpe me grete God of kynde!
I would amend it ere it were night,	I wolde amenden it er that it were nyght,
If that I truly knew the cause	If that I verraily the cause knewe
And as I am a king's daughter true,	And as I am a kynges doghter trewe,
For God's love, come down from the tree;	For Goddes love, com fro the tree adoun;
I have of you such great compassion.	I have of yow so greet compassioun.
You slay me with your sorrow truly,	Ye sle me with youre sorwe verraily,
That treated himself so piteously.	That ferde with hymself so pitously.
I saw never ere now no bird nor beast	Ne saugh I nevere er now no bryd ne beest
Or what can be your help? For west nor east	Or what may been youre help? For west nor est
For love of God, spare yourself,	For love of God, as dooth youreselven grace,
Must be the reason for your cruel deed,	Moot been enchesoun of youre cruel dede,
Which proves well that either anger or fear	Which proveth wel that outher ire or drede
For you avenge yourself upon yourself,	For ye youreself upon yourself yow wreke,
Of other harm there is no need to speak.	Of oother harm it nedeth nat to speke.
That most cause woe to a gentle heart;	That causen moost a gentil herte wo;
For, as I believe, these are the two causes	For, as I trowe, thise been causes two
"Is this for sorrow of death or loss of love?	"Is this for sorwe of deeth or los of love?
Said Canacee unto this hawk above.	Quod Canacee unto this hauk above.
That you be in this pain such as the Furies suffer in hell?"	That ye be in this furial pyne of helle?"
Unto the hawk, as you shall after hear:	Unto the hauk, as ye shal after heere:
Until at the last she spoke in this manner	Til atte laste she spak in this manere
A long while to await her she stood	A longe whil to wayten hire she stood
When it swooned next, for lack of blood.	Whan that it swowned next, for lak of blood.
The falcon must fall from the branch,	The faukon moste fallen fro the twiste,
And spread wide her skirt, for well she knew	And heeld hir lappe abrood, for wel she wiste
And on this falcon looks compassionately,	And on this faukon looketh pitously,
And to the tree she goes full hastily,	And to the tree she gooth ful hastily,
And well nigh for the pity she almost died.	And wel neigh for the routhe almoost she deyde.
And could answer him in his language in return,	And koude answeren hym in his ledene ageyn,
That any fowl may in his language say,	That any fowel may in his leden seyn,
Through which she well understood every thing	Thurgh which she understood wel every thyng
That on her finger bore the strange ring,	That on hir fynger baar the queynte ryng,
This fair king's daughter, Canacee,	This faire kynges doghter, Canacee,
Until well nigh is she fallen from the tree.	Til wel neigh is she fallen fro the tree.
She swoons every now and then for lack of blood,	She swowneth now and now for lak of blood,
From foreign land; and repeatedly, as she stood,	Of fremde land; and everemoore, as she stood,
A peregrine falcon then seemed she	A faucon peregryn thanne semed she
As well in plumage as in nobility	As wel of plumage as of gentillesse
That heard of its equal in beauty,	That herde of swich another of fairnesse,
If I could well describe a falcon,	If that I koude a faucon wel discryve,
For there was never yet no man alive,	For ther nas nevere yet no man on lyve,
For sorrow of her, she shrieked always so loud.	For sorwe of hire, she shrighte alwey so loude.
That would not have wept, if he could weep,	That nolde han wept, if that he wepe koude,
That dwells either in wood or in forest,	That dwelleth outher in wode or in forest,
That there is no tiger, nor any beast so cruel	That ther nys tygre, ne noon so crueel beest
And with her beak herself she so stabbed	And with hir beek hirselven so she prighte
Ran down the length of the tree in which she stood.	Ran endelong the tree ther-as she stood.
With both her wings until the red blood	With bothe hir wynges til the rede blood
She had beaten herself so pitifully	Ybeten hadde she hirself so pitously
That all the wood resounded with her cry.	That all the wode resouned of hire cry.
That with a pitiful voice so did cry	That with a pitous voys so gan to crye
There sat a falcon over her head full high,	Ther sat a faucon over hire heed ful hye,
As Canacee was amusing herself in her walk,	As Canacee was pleyyng in hir walk,
In a tree, for dryness as white as chalk,	Amydde a tree, for drye as whit as chalk,
And quickly put an end to her walking.	And maken of hir walkyng soone an ende.
And by the same reason, it seems to me,	And by the same resoun, thynketh me,
Because of the overabundance of its prolixity;	For fulsomnesse of his prolixitee;
The taste (for it) passes away more and more,	The savour passeth ever lenger the moore,
Of those who have listened to it for a long time,	Of hem that han it after herkned yoore,
If it is delayed until the desire (to hear it) is cold	If it be taried til that lust be coold
The main point for which every tale is told,	The knotte why that every tale is toold,
Exactly by their song, and knew all their meaning.	Right by hir song, and knew al hire entente.
For right away she knew what they meant	For right anon she wiste what they mente
And for the fowls that she heard sing.	And for the foweles that she herde synge.
That it made all their hearts to lighten,	That it made alle hire hertes for to lighte,
But nonetheless it was so fair a sight	But nathelees it was so fair a sighte
Made the sun seem ruddy and broad;	Made the sonne to seme rody and brood;
The vapor that glided up from the earth	The vapour which that fro the erthe glood
And in a path forth in the park goes she.	And in a trench forth in the park gooth she.
With no more than five or six of her entourage;	Nat but with fyve or sixe of hir meynee;
Lightly, to amuse herself and walk on foot,	Lightly, for to pleye and walke on foote,
Clothed, in accord with the lusty season sweet,	Arrayed after the lusty seson soote
And forth she walks at an easy pace,	And forth she walketh esily a pas,
That in the Ram is four degrees up run --	That in the Ram is foure degrees up ronne --
As ruddy and bright(ly shining) as does the young sun,	As rody and bright as dooth the yonge sonne,
Up rises fresh Canacee herself,	Up riseth fresshe Canacee hireselve,
And up they rise, a good ten or twelve;	And up they rysen, wel a ten or twelve;
Her governess calls a great crowd of women,	Hire maistresse clepeth wommen a greet route,
No longer to sleep -- and walk about."	Ne lenger for to slepe, and walke aboute."
"I want," said she, "to arise -- for I desire	"I wol," quod she, "arise, for me leste
Thus early, for the folk are all in bed?"	Thus erly, for the folk been alle on reste?"
And said, "Madame, whither do you wish to go	And seyde, "Madame, whider wil ye goon
These old women who are customarily wise,	Thise olde wommen that been gladly wyse,
And said that she wished to rise.	And seyde that hire liste for to ryse.
She called on her governess who was beside her,	She cleped on hir maistresse hire bisyde,
Therefore, before the sun did glide upward,	Wherfore, er that the sonne gan up glyde,
Made by her mirror, she had a vision.	Of hire mirour, she hadde a visioun.
And in her sleep, directly because of the mental impression	And in hire sleep, right for impressioun
That twenty times she changed her color;	That twenty tyme she changed hir colour;
Both of her strange ring and her mirror,	Bothe of hir queynte ryng and hire mirour,
For such a joy she in her heart took	For swich a joye she in hir herte took
Nor in the morning to appear unfestive,	Ne on the morwe unfeestlich for to se,
She did not wish to be grown pale,	Hir liste nat appalled for to be,
To go to rest soon after it was evening.	To goon to reste soone after it was eve.
For of her father had she taken leave	For of hir fader hadde she take leve
She was very temperate, as women are;	She was ful mesurable, as wommen be;
The most part, except for Canacee.	The mooste part, but it were Canacee.
They sleep until it was nine a.m.,	They slepen til that it was pryme large,
That causes dreams of which there is no significance.	That causeth dreem of which ther nys no charge.
Their heads were full of fumes from drinking wine,	Ful were hire heddes of fumositee,
As sleep them bad; they took it for the best.	As sleep hem bad; they tooke it for the beste.
And every creature did draw himself to his rest,	And every wight gan drawe hym to his reste,
They thank him yawning, by two, by three,	They thanken hym galpynge, by two, by thre,
"Cherish blood, nature's friend," said he.	"Cherisseth blood, natures freend," quod he.
For blood (the humor) was in its domination.	For blood was in his domynacioun.
And said that it was time to lie down,	And seyde that it was tyme to lye adoun,
And with a yawning mouth he kissed them all,	And with a galpyng mouth hem alle he keste,
That much drink and activity make rest necessary;	That muchel drynke and labour wolde han reste;
Did on them wink (as a signal) and bad them take notice	Gan on hem wynke and bad hem taken keep
Until well nigh the day began to spring.	Til wel ny the day bigan to sprynge.
This Cambyuskan entertaining his lords	This Cambyuskan his lordes festeiynge
But thus I leave in pleasure and jollity	But thus I lete in lust and jolitee
Out of their sight; you get no more from me.	Out of hir sighte; ye gete namoore of me.
The horse vanished, I know not in what manner,	The hors vanysshed, I noot in what manere,
And kept among his jewels precious and dear.	And kept among his jueles leeve and deere.
The bridle is carried unto the tower	The brydel is unto the tour yborn
Returns to his revel as before.	Repeireth to his revel as biforn.
Full glad and blithe, this noble doughty king	Ful glad and blithe, this noble doughty kyng
And has correctly understood	And hath conceyved in his wit aright
When the king was informed by that knight,	Enformed whan the kyng was of that knyght,
Ride when you wish; there is nothing more to do."	Ride whan yow list; ther is namoore to doone."
Between you and me, and that very soon.	Bitwixe yow and me, and that ful soone.
In such a manner as I shall to you say	In swich a gyse as I shal to yow seyn
When you wish to call him again	Whan that yow list to clepen hym ageyn
And come again, be it by day or night,	And come agayn, be it by day or nyght,
Out of the sight of every sort of creature,	Out of the sighte of every maner wight,
Turn this peg, and he will vanish at once	Trille this pyn, and he wol vanysshe anoon
He shall not thence be drawn nor carried away.	He shal nat thennes been ydrawe ne ybore.
Though all the world the contrary had sworn,	Though al the world the contrarie hadde yswore,
And in that place he will abide still.	And in that place he wol abyde stille.
And he will down descend and do your will,	And he wol doun descende and doon youre wille,
For therein lies the essence of working the device,	For therin lith th' effect of al the gyn,
Bid him descend, and turn another peg,	Bidde hym descende, and trille another pyn,
And when you come where you desire to abide,	And whan ye come ther as yow list abyde,
Or to what country, that you want to ride.	Or to what contree, that yow list to ryde.
You must name him to what place also,	Ye moote nempne hym to what place also,
You must turn a peg, which stands in his ear,	Ye mooten trille a pyn, stant in his ere,
But, when you desire to ride anywhere,	But, whan yow list to ryden anywhere,
And said, "Sir, there is no more to say,	And seyde, "Sire, ther is namoore to seyne,
When this knight laid hand upon his rein,	Whan that this knyght leyde hand upon his reyne,
This horse at once began to trip and dance,	This hors anoon bigan to trippe and daunce,
And prayed him to tell how to control him.	And preyde hym to telle his governaunce.
About the power of this courser and the might,	The vertu of this courser and the myght,
But finally the king asks this knight	But fynally the kyng axeth this knyght
Nor was there such a wondering as was then.	Ne was ther swich a wondryng as was tho.
That since the great siege of Troy was,	That syn the grete sege of Troie was,
Such wondering was there about this horse of brass	Swich wondryng was ther on this hors of bras
Of lords and of ladies about him.	Of lordes and of ladyes hym aboute.
To see this horse of brass, with all in a crowd	To seen this hors of bras, with al a route
At after-supper goes this noble king	At after-soper gooth this noble kyng
And dainties more than are in my knowing.	And deyntees mo than been in my knowyng.
Has plenty for the highest ranks and for the lowest,	Hath plentee to the meeste and to the leeste,
Each man knows well that a king's feast	Ech man woot wel that a kynges feeste
What need is there to tell you their splendor?	What nedeth yow rehercen hire array?
Unto the temple, as was reasonable, they wend.	Unto the temple, as reson was, they wende.
They eat and drink, and when this had an end,	They ete and drynke, and whan this hadde an ende,
The spiced cakes and the wine are come quickly.	The spices and the wyn is come anoon.
The ushers and the squires are gone,	The usshers and the squiers been ygoon,
And also the wine, amid all this music.	And eek the wyn, in al this melodye.
The steward ordered the spiced cakes to be brought quickly,	The styward bit the spices for to hye,
I leave them until people go to the supper.	I lete hem til men to the soper dresse.
I say no more, but in this jollity	I sey namoore, but in this jolynesse
Therefore I pass over all this pleasure;	Therfore I passe of al this lustiheed;
For dread of jealous men's perceptions?	For drede of jalouse mennes aperceyvynges?
Such subtle looking and dissimulations	Swich subtil lookyng and dissymulynges
So strange, and such cheerful countenances,	So unkouthe, and swiche fresshe contenaunces,
Who could tell you the form of dances	Who koude telle yow the forme of daunces
That should describe for you such splendor.	That sholde yow devysen swich array.
And be a convivial man as gay as May,	And been a feestlych man as fressh as May,
He must have known love and its service	He moste han knowen love and his servyse
That a dull-witted man is not able to describe.	That is nat able a dul man to devyse.
Here is the revel and the jollity	Heere is the revel and the jolitee
This foreign knight is fetched to him right away,	This strange knyght is fet to hym ful soone,
This noble king is set upon his throne.	This noble kyng is set upon his trone.
And looks on them with a friendly eye.	And looketh on hem with a freendly ye.
For in the Fish (Pisces) their lady sat full high,	For in the Fyssh hir lady sat ful hye,
Now dance lusty Venus's children dear,	Now dauncen lusty Venus children deere,
That it is like a heaven to hear.	That it is lyk an hevene for to heere.
Where they sound diverse instruments	Ther as they sownen diverse instrumentz
Until he came to his chamber of tapestries (Presence Chamber),	Til he cam to his chambre of parementz,
Before him goes the loud music	Toforn hym gooth the loude mynstralcye
When this Tarter king, Cambyuskan,	Whan that this Tartre kyng, Cambyuskan,
The noble Lion, with his star Aldiran,	The gentil Leon, with his Aldiran,
And yet ascending was the beast royal,	And yet ascendynge was the beest roial,
Phebus (the sun) has left the noon-time angle,	Phebus hath laft the angle meridional,
Until the king did from the table arise.	Til that the kyng gan fro the bord aryse.
Thus they chatter, and conjecture, and speculate	Thus jangle they, and demen, and devyse
And all things, until the cause is known.	And alle thyng, til that the cause is wyst.
About ebb tide, about flood tide, about spider webs, and about mist,	On ebbe, on flood, on gossomer, and on myst,
As intensely some wonder about the cause of thunder,	As soore wondren somme on cause of thonder,
But, because they have known it so long,	But, for they han yknowen it so fern,
And yet glass is not like ashes of fern;	And yet nys glas nat lyk asshen of fern;
Wondrous to make glass out of ashes of fern,	Wonder to maken of fern-asshen glas,
But nonetheless some said that it was	But nathelees somme seiden that it was
Thus say the people and draw themselves aside.	Thus seyn the peple and drawen hem apart.
Had a reputation for cunning in such art.	Hadde a name of konnyng in swich art.
Save that he Moses and king Solomon	Save that he Moyses and kyng Salomon
Of the craft of making rings they never heard anything,	Of craft of rynges herde they nevere noon,
And all said that such a wondrous thing	And seyden alle that swich a wonder thyng
Which is unknown, at least unto me.	Which is unknowe, algates unto me.
And how and when it should be hardened,	And how and whanne it sholde yharded be,
And speak of chemicals moreover,	And speke of medicynes therwithal,
They speak of various ways of hardening of metal,	They speken of sondry hardyng of metal,
Of which right now you have yourselves heard.	Of which right now ye han youreselven herd.
Exactly in such a way as men may do with the sword	Right in swich wise as men may with the swerd
For he could with it both heal and harm,	For he koude with it bothe heele and dere,
And of Achilles with his magical spear,	And of Achilles with his queynte spere,
And fell in speech of Thelophus the king,	And fille in speche of Thelophus the kyng,
And other folk have wondered on the sword	And oother folk han wondred on the swerd
As know they who have heard their books (read aloud).	As knowen they that han hir bookes herd.
Of intricate mirrors and of optical lenses,	Of queynte mirours and of perspectives,
And Aristotle, that wrote while they lived	And Aristotle, that writen in hir lyves
They speak of Alocen, and Vitulon,	They speken of Alocen, and Vitulon,
And said that in Rome was such a one.	And seyde that in Rome was swich oon.
Of angles and of ingenious reflections,	Of anglis and of slye reflexiouns,
Naturally, by arrangements	Naturelly, by composiciouns
Another answered and said it might well be	Another answerde and seyde it myghte wel be
That was carried up into the principal tower,	That born was up into the maister-tour,
And some of them wondered about the mirror,	And somme of hem wondred on the mirour,
They habitually suppose the worse.	They demen gladly to the badder ende.
Than they in their ignorance can comprehend;	Than they kan in hir lewednesse comprehende;
Of things that are made more subtly	Of thynges that been maad moore subtilly
As ignorant people speculate commonly	As lewed peple demeth comunly
Of various conjectures thus they chatter and debate,	Of sondry doutes thus they jangle and trete,
Such as conjurers play at these great feasts."	As jogelours pleyen at thise feestes grete."
An illusion made by some magic,	An apparence ymaad by som magyk,
Another whispered to his fellow quietly,	Another rowned to his felawe lowe,
It would be very good if all such things were known."	It were right good that al swich thyng were knowe."
That prepare themselves to conquer this city.	That shapen hem this citee for to wynne.
I believe some men of arms are in there,	I trowe som men of armes been therinne,
"My heart," said one, "is evermore in dread;	"Myn herte," quod oon, "is everemoore in drede;
As men in these old romances read.	As men in thise olde geestes rede.
That brought Troy to destruction,	That broghte Troie to destruccion,
Or else it was Sinon the Greek's horse,	Or elles it was the Grekes hors Synon,
The hors that had wings in order to fly;	The hors that hadde wynges for to flee;
Retelling these old poems,	Rehersynge of thise olde poetries,
And made arguments according to their fantasies,	And maden skiles after hir fantasies,
They murmured as does a swarm of bees,	They murmureden as dooth a swarm of been,
As many heads, as many opinions there are.	As many heddes, as manye wittes ther been.
Diverse folk diversely they deemed;	Diverse folk diversely they demed;
It was from fairyland, as it seemed to the people.	It was a fairye, as the peple semed.
How it could move, and yet was of brass;	How that it koude gon, and was of bras;
But evermore their greatest wonder was	But everemoore hir mooste wonder was
To any extent, as all the people believed.	In no degree, as al the people wende.
For certainly, from his tail unto his ear	For certes, fro his tayl unto his ere
As if it were a noble Apulian courser.	As it a gentil Poilleys courser were.
In additon, with such equine virtues, and so quick of eye,	Therwith so horsly, and so quyk of ye,
Exactly as if it were a steed of Lombardy;	Right as it were a steede of Lumbardye;
So well proportioned to be strong,	So wel proporcioned for to been strong,
For it was so high, and so broad and long,	For it so heigh was, and so brood and long,
To stare on this horse that stands so,	To gauren on this hors that stondeth so,
Great was the crowd that swarms to and fro	Greet was the prees that swarmeth to and fro
To remove him, as you shall later hear.	To voyden hym, as ye shal after heere.
And therefore in the place they have it left	And therfore in the place they han it laft
And the reason why? Because they do not know the craft.	And cause why? For they kan nat the craft.
Despite any contrivance of windlass or pulley;	For noon engyn of wyndas or polyve;
No man there can drive it out of the place	Ther may no man out of the place it dryve
It stands as if it were glued to the ground.	It stant as it were to the ground yglewed.
The horse of brass, that can not be moved,	The hors of bras, that may nat be remewed,
But truly, without any lie,	But sikerly, withouten any fable,
Solemnly, where she sits at the table.	Solempnely, ther she sit at the table.
And unto Canacee this ring is carried	And unto Canacee this ryng is bore
And carried straightway into the high tower	And born anon into the heighe tour
This is to say, the sword and the mirror --	This is to seyn, the swerd and the mirour --
The presents are full royally fetched --	The presentes been ful roially yfet --
And is unarmed, and set to dinner.	And is unarmed, and to mete yset.
This knight is to his chamber led straightway,	This knyght is to his chambre lad anoon,
Stands in the court, still as any stone.	Stant in the court, stille as any stoon.
His steed, which shone like the bright sun,	His steede, which that shoon as sonne brighte,
He rides out of hall and down he alit.	He rideth out of halle and doun he lighte.
And when this knight has thus his tale told,	And whan this knyght hath thus his tale toold,
This is a very truth, without lying;	This is a verray sooth, withouten glose;
Stroke him in the wound, and it will close.	Stroke hym in the wounde, and it wol close.
You must with the blunt side of the sword again	Ye moote with the platte swerd ageyn
Where he is hurt; this is as much to say,	Ther he is hurt; this is as muche to seyn,
To stroke him with the flat side in that same place	To stroke hym with the plat in thilke place
Shall never be whole until you please, out of kindness,	Shal never be hool til that yow list, of grace,
And whatever man that is wounded by the stroke	And what man that is wounded with the strook
Were it as thick as is a branched oak;	Were it as thikke as is a branched ook;
Throughout his armor it will carve and bite,	Thurghout his armure it wole kerve and byte,
"This naked sword, that hangs by my side,	"This naked swerd, that hangeth by my syde,
Although his wounds be ever so deep and wide.	Al be his woundes never so depe and wyde.
She shall also know, and to whom it will provide a remedy,	She shal eek knowe, and whom it wol do boote,
And every herb that grows upon root	And every gras that groweth upon roote
And answer him in his language in reply;	And answere hym in his langage ageyn;
And know his meaning openly and plain,	And knowe his menyng openly and pleyn,
That she shall not well understand his speech,	That she ne shal wel understonde his stevene,
There is no fowl that flies under the heaven	Ther is no fowel that fleeth under the hevene
Upon her thumb or bear it in her purse,	Upon hir thombe or in hir purs it bere,
"The power of the ring, if you will hear,	"The vertu of the ryng, if ye wol heere,
Your excellent daughter that is here.	Youre excellente doghter that is heere.
He has sent to my lady Canacee,	He hath sent to my lady Canacee,
This mirror and this ring, that you can see,	This mirour and this ryng, that ye may see,
For this reason, (to protect) against this amorous spring time,	Wherfore, ageyn this lusty someres tyde,
So clearly that there shall no thing be hidden.	So openly that ther shal no thyng hyde.
His new love, and all his trickery,	His newe love, and al his subtiltee,
If he be false, she shall his treason see,	If he be fals, she shal his tresoun see,
Has set her heart on any sort of creature,	Hath set hire herte on any maner wight,
And clearly who is your friend or foe.	And openly who is youre freend or foo.
Unto your reign or to yourself also,	Unto youre regne or to youreself also,
When there shall befall any adversity	Whan ther shal fallen any adversitee
Has such a power that men can in it see	Hath swich a myght that men may in it see
"This mirror also, that I have in my hand,	"This mirour eek, that I have in myn hond,
And knew full many a magical seal and many a controlling force.	And knew ful many a seel and many a bond.
Before he had finished this operation,	Er he had doon this operacion,
He observed many a configuration of the stars	He wayted many a constellacion
He who made it knew full many an ingenious contrivance.	He that it wroghte koude ful many a gyn.
Though you sleep or rest on his back,	Though that ye slepen on his bak or reste,
Without harm, until you be where you wished,	Withouten harm, til ye be ther yow leste,
This same steed shall bear you ever more,	This same steede shal bere yow evere moore,
As does an eagle when he desires to soar,	As dooth an egle whan hym list to soore,
Or, if you desire to fly as high in the air	Or, if yow lyst to fleen as hye in the air
Without harm to you, through foul or fair;	Withouten wem of yow, thurgh foul or fair;
To which your heart wishes to go,	To which youre herte wilneth for to pace,
Bear your body into every place	Beren youre body into every place
Where-ever you desire, in drought or else showers,	Wher-so yow lyst, in droghte or elles shoures,
Can in the space of one natural day --	Kan in the space of o day natureel --
This steed of brass, that easily and well	This steede of bras, that esily and weel
By me, who am all ready to obey your command,	By me, that am al redy at youre heeste,
And sends you, in honor of your feast,	And sendeth yow, in honour of youre feeste,
Salutes you, as he best knows how and can,	Saleweth yow, as he best kan and may,
My liege lord, on this solemn day	My lige lord, on this solempne day
He said, "The king of Araby and of India,	He seyde, "The kyng of Arabe and of Inde,
If it so be that I have it (correctly) in mind.	If it so be that I have it in mynde.
Thus much amounts all that ever he meant (to say),	Thus muche amounteth al that evere he mente,
Nor can not climb over so high a stile,	Ne kan nat clymben over so heigh a style,
Although I can not imitate his style,	Al be that I kan nat sowne his stile,
As teaches the art of speech to those who learn it.	As techeth art of speche hem that it leere.
Conforming to his words was his facial expression,	Accordant to his wordes was his cheere,
And in order that his tale should seem the better,	And for his tale sholde seme the bettre,
Without one mistake of syllable or of letter;	Withouten vice of silable or of lettre;
In accordance with the form used in his language,	After the forme used in his langage,
He with a manly voice said his message,	He with a manly voys seide his message,
And after this, before the high table,	And after this, biforn the heighe bord,
Though he were come again out of Fairyland,	Though he were comen ayeyn out of Fairye,
That Gawain, with his old courtesy,	That Gawayn, with his olde curteisye,
As well in speech as in countenance,	As wel in speche as in contenaunce,
With such high reverence and respect,	With so heigh reverence and obeisaunce,
In the order in which they sat in the hall,	By ordre, as they seten in the halle,
Salutes king and queen and all the lords,	Saleweth kyng and queene and lordes alle,
All armed, except his head, full richly,	Al armed, save his heed, ful richely,
This strange knight, who came thus suddenly,	This strange knyght, that cam thus sodeynly,
Full intently they gaze, young and old.	Ful bisily they wayten, yonge and olde.
In all the hall there was not spoken a word	In al the halle ne was ther spoken a word
And up he rides to the high table.	And up he rideth to the heighe bord.
And by his side a naked sword hanging;	And by his syde a naked swerd hangyng;
Upon his thumb he had of gold a ring,	Upon his thombe he hadde of gold a ryng,
And in his hand a broad mirror of glass.	And in his hand a brood mirour of glas.
There came a knight upon a steed of brass,	Ther cam a knyght upon a steede of bras,
In at the hall door all suddenly	In at the halle dore al sodeynly
Before him at the table delightfully,	Biforn hym at the bord deliciously,
Listening to his minstrels playing their instruments	Herknynge his mynstralles hir thynges pleye
And so it befell that after the third course,	And so bifel that after the thridde cours,
Unto my first topic I will return.	Unto my firste I wole have my recours.
And because it is not essential to the tale but a loss of time;	And for it is no fruyt but los of tyme;
I will not tarry you, for it is nine a.m.	I wol nat taryen yow, for it is pryme
There is no man that can report all.	Ther nys no man that may reporten al.
That in this land is reckoned of but little value;	That in this lond men recche of it but smal;
There is some food that is considered very delicious	Ther is som mete that is ful deynte holde
Also in that land, as old knights tell,	Eek in that lond, as tellen knyghtes olde,
Nor of their swans, nor of their young herons.	Ne of hir swannes, ne of hire heronsewes.
At every course the order of their service.	At every cours the ordre of hire servyse.
And also it is not necessary to describe	And eek it nedeth nat for to devyse
Then would it occupy a summer's day,	Thanne wolde it occupie a someres day,
Of which if I should tell all the festivities,	Of which if I shal tellen al th' array,
That in this world there was none like it;	That in this world ne was ther noon it lyche;
And holds his feast so solemn and so rich	And halt his feeste so solempne and so ryche
With diadem, full nobly in his palace,	With diademe, ful heighe in his paleys,
In royal vestments sits on his dais,	In roial vestiment sit on his deys,
This Cambyuskan, of whom I have you told,	This Cambyuskan, of which I have yow toold,
They seemed to have gotten themselves protections	Hem semed han geten hem protecciouns
Full loudly sang of their desires.	Ful loude songen hire affecciouns.
What for the season and the young greenery,	What for the sesoun and the yonge grene,
For which the fowls, in response to the bright sun,	For which the foweles, agayn the sonne sheene,
Full pleasant was the weather and mild,	Ful lusty was the weder and benigne,
In Aries, the choleric hot sign.	In Aries, the colerik hoote signe.
In Mars' face and in his astrological house	In Martes face and in his mansioun
For he was near his position of greatest power	For he was neigh his exaltacioun
Phoebus the sun full jolly was and clear,	Phebus the sonne ful joly was and cleer,
Proclaimed throughout Sarray his city,	Doon cryen thurghout Sarray his citee,
He had the feast of his nativity	He leet the feeste of his nativitee
As he was accustomed from year to year, I suppose,	As he was wont fro yeer to yeer, I deme,
Has twenty winters borne his diadem,	Hath twenty wynter born his diademe,
And it so befell that when this Cambyuskan	And so bifel that whan this Cambyuskan
I am none such, I must speak as I can.	I am noon swich, I moot speke as I kan.
If he should describe her in every detail.	If he sholde hire discryven every part.
Who knows his figures of speech appropriate to that art,	That koude his colours longynge for that art,
He must be an excellent rhetorician	It moste been a rethor excellent
I dare not undertake so high a thing.	I dar nat undertake so heigh a thyng.
It lies not in my tongue, nor in my abilities;	It lyth nat in my tonge, n' yn my konnyng;
But to tell you all her beauty,	But for to telle yow al hir beautee,
That youngest was, and was called Canacee.	That yongest was, and highte Canacee.
A daughter had this worthy king also,	A doghter hadde this worthy kyng also,
That other son was called Cambalo.	That oother sone was cleped Cambalo.
Of whom the eldest was called Algarsyf;	Of whiche the eldeste highte Algarsyf;
Had two sons on Elpheta his wife,	Hadde two sones on Elpheta his wyf,
This noble king, this Tartar Cambyuskan,	This noble kyng, this Tartre Cambyuskan,
And always so well maintained the splendor appropriate to his rank	And kept alwey so wel roial estat
He was a handsome person and fortunate,	A fair persone he was and fortunat,
As any young knight of all his household.	As any bacheler of al his hous.
Young, vigorous, and strong, in arms as desirous (to excel)	Yong, fressh, and strong, in armes desirous
Of his heart as stable as the center of any circle;	Of his corage as any centre stable;
Truthful of his word, benign, and honorable;	Sooth of his word, benigne, and honurable;
And compassionate and just, always impartial;	And pitous and just, alwey yliche;
And moreover he was hardy, wise, and rich,	And therto he was hardy, wys, and riche,
He kept its law, to which he was sworn;	He kepte his lay, to which that he was sworn;
He lacked nothing that is appropriate to a king.	Hym lakked noght that longeth to a kyng.
So excellent a lord in all things:	So excellent a lord in alle thyng:
That there was nowhere in any region	That ther was nowher in no regioun
Who in his time was of such great renown	Which in his tyme was of so greet renoun
This noble king was called Cambyuskan,	This noble kyng was cleped Cambyuskan,
Through which there died many a doughty man.	Thurgh which ther dyde many a doughty man.
There dwelt a king who waged war on Russia,	Ther dwelte a kyng that werreyed Russye,
At Sarray, in the land of Tartars,	At Sarray, in the land of Tartarye,
Here begins the Squire's Tale.	Here bigynneth the Squieres Tale.
Have me excused if I speak amiss;	Have me excused if I speke amys;
Against your desire; a tale I will tell.	Agayn youre lust; a tale wol I telle.
With a hearty will, for I will not rebel	With hertly wyl, for I wol nat rebelle
"Nay, sir," said he, "but I will speak as I can	"Nay, sire," quod he, "but I wol seye as I kan
Know as much about that as any man."	Konnen theron as muche as any man."
And say something about love, for certainly you	And sey somwhat of love, for certes ye
"Squire, come nearer, if it be your will,	"Squier, com neer, if it youre wille be,
Here ends the Summoner's Tale.	Heere endeth the Somonours Tale.
My tale is done; we are almost at town.	My tale is doon; we been almoost at towne.
He is no fool, nor possessed by any demon.	He nys no fool, ne no demonyak.
And great intelligence made him speak as he spoke;	And heigh wit made hym speken as he spak;
Concerning the churl, they said, shrewdness	Touchynge the cherl, they seyde, subtiltee
As well as Euclid or Ptolemy.	As wel as Euclide [dide] or Ptholomee.
Said that Jankyn spoke, in this matter,	Seyde that Jankyn spak, in this matere,
The lord, the lady, and each man, except the friar,	The lord, the lady, and ech man, save the frere,
He bears him so faire and holily."	He bereth hym so faire and hoolily."
And so would all his convent certainly (agree),	And so wolde al his covent hardily,
He had the first smell of three farts;	He hadde the firste smel of fartes thre;
With preaching in the pulpit where he stood,	With prechyng in the pulpit ther he stood,
He has to-day taught us so much good	He hath to-day taught us so muche good
And certainly he has it well deserved.	And certeinly he hath it weel disserved.
The worthy men of them shall first be served;	The worthy men of hem shul first be served;
The noble usage of friars yet is this,	The noble usage of freres yet is this,
Shall have the first fruit, as is reasonable.	Shal have the firste fruyt, as resoun is.
Because he is a man of greet honor,	By cause he is a man of greet honour,
Except that this worthy man, your confessor,	Save that this worthy man, youre confessour,
And also the stink, unto the spokes' ends,	And eke the stynk, unto the spokes ende,
By proof which is logical,	By preeve which that is demonstratif,
And you shall see, on peril of my life (I swear),	And ye shul seen, up peril of my lyf,
Upon the nave, and make him let a fart.	Upon the nave, and make hym lete a fart.
And set him right on the wheel of this cart,	And sette hym on the wheel right of this cart,
As any drum, hither be brought;	As any tabour, hyder been ybroght;
Then shall this churl, with belly stiff and taut	Thanne shal this cherl, with bely stif and toght
Shall hold his nose upright under the nave.	Shal holde his nose upright under the nave.
Your noble confessor -- may God him save! --	Youre noble confessour -- there God hym save! --
A friar shall very firmly lay his nose.	Ful sadly leye his nose shal a frere.
Then shall they kneel down, all together,	Thanne shal they knele doun, by oon assent,
Shall complete the number of his convent.	Shal parfourne up the nombre of his covent.
Your confessor here, for his worthiness,	Youre confessour heere, for his worthynesse,
For thirteen is a convent, as I believe.	For thrittene is a covent, as I gesse.
And bring me then twelve friars. Know you why?	And bryng me thanne twelve freres. Woot ye why?
Twelve spokes has a cartwheel commonly.	Twelve spokes hath a cartwheel comunly.
But see that it has all its spokes --	But looke that it have his spokes alle --
Let a cartwheel be brought here into this hall;	Lat brynge a cartwheel heere into this halle;
Without wind or disturbance of air,	Withouten wynd or perturbynge of air,
A gown-cloth, by God and by Saint John!"	A gowne-clooth, by God and by Seint John!"
"Tell," said the lord, "and thou shalt have straightway	"Tel," quod the lord, "and thou shalt have anon
Among your convent, if it pleased me."	Among youre covent, if it lyked me."
How this fart should evenly be divided	How that this fart sholde evene deled be
To you, sir friar, providing you be not angry,	To yow, sire frere, so ye be nat wrooth,
I could tell, for a cloth to make a gown,	I koude telle, for a gowne-clooth,
"My lord," said he, "if you be not displeased,	"My lord," quod he, "be ye nat yvele apayd,
Of all the things which I have told you.	Of alle thynges whiche I have yow sayd.
Who carved his meat, and heard word by word	That karf his mete, and herde word by word
Let him go hang himself in the devil's name!"	Lat hym go honge hymself a devel weye!"
Now eat your food, and let the churl go play;	Now ete youre mete, and lat the cherl go pleye;
I consider him certainly one possessed by a demon!	I holde hym certeyn a demonyak!
Unto my confessor to-day he spoke!	Unto my confessour to-day he spak!
What, lo, my churl, lo, yet how shrewdly	What, lo, my cherl, lo, yet how shrewedly
If it were divided equally.	If that it were departed equally.
There is no man can judge, by my faith,	Ther is no man kan deemen, by my fey,
And ever it wastes away little by little.	And evere it wasteth litel and litel awey.
Is nothing but reverberation of air,	Nis but of eir reverberacioun,
Ey, clever churl, God let him never prosper!	Ey, nyce cherl, God lete him nevere thee!
It is an impossibility; it can not be.	It is an inpossible; it may nat be.
To every man equally? Tell me how.	To every man ylike? Tel me how.
Who ever heard of such a thing before now?	Who evere herde of swich a thyng er now?
Lo, sirs," said the lord, "with bad luck (to him)!	Lo, sires," quod the lord, "with harde grace!
Oh ingenious, proud churl, I curse his face!	O nyce, proude cherl, I shrewe his face!
As of the sound or odor of a fart?	As of the soun or savour of a fart?
That every man should have equally his part	That every man sholde have yliche his part
Who should make a logical proof	Who sholde make a demonstracion
In the art of measuring (arithmetic) shall there no man find,	In ars-metrike shal ther no man fynde,
I believe the devil put it in his mind.	I trowe the devel putte it in his mynde.
Never previously before now heard I of such a matter.	Nevere erst er now herde I of swich mateere.
To show such a problem to the friar?	To shewe swich a probleme to the frere?
"How had this churl imagination	"How hadde this cherl ymaginacioun
And in his heart he rolled up and down,	And in his herte he rolled up and doun,
The lord sat still as if he were in a trance,	The lord sat stille as he were in a traunce,
Equally to every man, with bad luck (to him)!"	To every man yliche, with meschaunce!"
To divide that which will not be divided	To parte that wol nat departed be
I shall defame him wherever I speak,	I shal disclaundre hym over al ther I speke,
Unless I can be avenged in another manner,	But I on oother wyse may be wreke,
"My lady," said he, "by God, I shall not lie,	"Madame," quod he, "by God, I shal nat lye,
I consider him in a sort of delirium."	I holde hym in a manere frenesye."
His sick head is full of foolishness;	His sike heed is ful of vanytee;
What should I say? God let him never prosper!	What shold I seye? God lat hym nevere thee!
I say a churl has done a churl's deed.	I seye a cherl hath doon a cherles dede.
"How I think" said she. "So help me God,	"How that me thynketh?" quod she. "So God me speede,
"My lady," said he, "how think you of this?"	"Madame," quod he, "how thynke ye herby?"
"Ey, God's mother," said she, "Blissful maid!	"Ey, Goddes mooder," quod she, "Blisful mayde!
Until she had heard what the friar said.	Til she had herd what the frere sayde.
The lady of the house always still sat	The lady of the hous ay stille sat
As you have heard before -- you know well what.	As ye han herd biforn -- ye woot wel what.
Tell me your grief." And he straightway told him,	Tel me youre grief." And he anon hym tolde,
For God's love, keep your patience!	For Goddes love, youre pacience ye holde!
You are the salt of the earth and the delight.	Ye been the salt of the erthe and the savour.
Do not be angry; you are my confessor;	Distempre yow noght; ye be my confessour;
"Sir," said the lord, "you know what is to be done.	"Sire," quod the lord, "ye woot what is to doone.
And so, consequently, to each degree	And so, per consequens, to ech degree
This day has happened to my order and me,	This day bityd is to myn ordre and me,
"Sir," said this friar, "an odious mischief	"Sire," quod this frere, "an odious meschief
"No matter," said he, "but tell me all your grief."	"No fors," quod he, "but tel me al youre grief."
Neither in market nor in your large hall."	Neither in market ne in youre large halle."
God likes not that `Rabbi' men us call,	God liketh nat that `Raby' men us calle,
Though I have had in school that honor.	Thogh I have had in scole that honour.
"No master, sir," said he, "but servant,	"No maister, sire," quod he, "but servitour,
"Now, master," said this lord, "I you beseech --"	"Now, maister," quod this lord, "I yow biseke --"
As that this old churl with white locks	As that this olde cherl with lokkes hoore
And yet there grieves me nothing so sore,	And yet ne greveth me nothyng so soore,
By what I have received in your town.	Of that I have receyved in youre toun.
That he would not be nauseated	That he nolde have abhomynacioun
That in this world is none so poor a servant boy	That in this world is noon so povre a page
God reward you, down in your village,	God yelde yow, adoun in youre village,
"I have," said he, "had an insult this day,	"I have," quod he, "had a despit this day,
And it shall be amended, if I can."	And it shal been amended, if I may."
Sit down right now, and tell me what your grief is,	Sit doun anon, and tel me what youre grief is,
I see well that there is something amiss;	I se wel that som thyng ther is amys;
What, friar John, what sort of carrying on is this?	What, frere John, what maner world is this?
This lord did look, and said, "Bless me!	This lord gan looke, and seide, "Benedicitee!
Until at the last he said, "God you see!"	Til atte laste he seyde, "God yow see!"
Hardly could the friar speak a word,	Unnethes myghte the frere speke a word,
Where the lord sat eating at his table;	Where as this lord sat etyng at his bord;
This friar came as if he were in a rage,	This frere cam as he were in a rage,
This worthy man was lord of that village.	This worthy man was lord of that village.
To whom he was always confessor.	To whom that he was alwey confessour.
At a rapid pace down to the court he goes,	A sturdy paas doun to the court he gooth,
He gnashed his teeth, he was so angry.	He grynte with his teeth, so was he wrooth.
He looked like a wild boar;	He looked as it were a wilde boor;
And fetched his fellow, where lay his store.	And fette his felawe, ther as lay his stoor.
And forth he goes, with a very angry look,	And forth he gooth, with a ful angry cheere,
Came leaping in and chased out the friar;	Cam lepynge in and chaced out the frere;
His servants, who heard this affray,	His meynee, whiche that herden this affray,
Thou shalt pay for this fart, if I can (do so)!"	Thou shalt abye this fart, if that I may!"
This hast thou done on purpose for spite.	This hastow for despit doon for the nones.
The friar up started as does a mad lion --	The frere up stirte as dooth a wood leoun --
That could have let a fart of such a sound.	That myghte have lete a fart of swich a soun.
There is no horse, pulling a cart,	Ther nys no capul, drawynge in a cart,
Amid his hand he let the friar a fart;	Amydde his hand he leet the frere a fart;
About his anus grope there and here,	Aboute his tuwel grope there and heere,
And when this sick man felt this friar	And whan this sike man felte this frere
In hope to find there a gift.	In hope for to fynde there a yifte.
And down his hand he thrusts to the cleft	And doun his hand he launcheth to the clifte
"Ah!" thought this friar, "That shall go with me!"	"A!" thoghte this frere, "That shal go with me!"
Beneath my buttock where shalt thou find	Bynethe my buttok there shaltow fynde
Said this man, "and grope well behind.	Seyde this man, "and grope wel bihynde.
"Now then, put in thy hand down by my back,"	"Now thanne, put in thyn hand doun by my bak,"
"Lo, have here my faith; I shall not fail (to keep my word)."	"Lo, heer my feith; in me shal be no lak."
And therewith his hand in his he lays,	And therwithal his hand in his he leith,
"I swear it," said this friar, "by my faith!"	"I swere it," quod this frere, "by my feith!"
Without fraud or quibbling."	Withouten fraude or cavillacioun."
This shalt thou swear on thy religious vows,	This shaltou swere on thy professioun,
That every friar have as much as the other.	That every frere have also muche as oother.
On this condition, and none other,	On this condicion, and oother noon,
And in thy hand thou shalt it have right now,	And in thyn hand thou shalt it have anon,
Unto your holy convent while I live;	Unto youre hooly covent whil I lyve;
"Well now," said he, "and something shall I give	"Now wel," quod he, "and somwhat shal I yive
I gave our lady our letter with our seal."	I took oure dame oure lettre with oure seel."
"Yes, certainly," said the friar, "trust well.	"Ye, certes," quod the frere, "trusteth weel.
You say me thus, that I am your brother?"	Ye sey me thus, how that I am youre brother?"
Said he, "that can I give, and none other.	Quod he, "that may I yeve, and noon oother.
"Such a thing as is in my possession,"	"Swich thyng as is in my possessioun,"
He wished that the friar had been afire	He wolde that the frere had been on-fire
This sick man grew well nigh mad for ire;	This sike man wax wel ny wood for ire;
And down at once he set himself on his knee.	And doun anon he sette hym on his knee.
Now Thomas, help, for holy charity!"	Now Thomas, help, for seinte charitee!"
In charity, thanked be our Lord!	In charitee, ythanked be oure Lord!
Have friars been -- that I find in the records --	Han freres been -- that fynde I of record --
"But since Elijah was, or Elisha,	"But syn Elye was, or Elise,
And that is not of recent times," said he,	And that is nat of litel tyme," quod he,
For who can teach and work as we know how?	For who kan teche and werchen as we konne?
So save me God, Thomas, by your leave,	So God me save, Thomas, by youre leve,
For whoever would rob us from this world,	For whoso wolde us fro this world bireve,
Then all the world goes to destruction.	Thanne goth the world al to destruccioun.
And if you lack our preaching,	And if yow lakke oure predicacioun,
For otherwise we must sell our books.	For elles moste we oure bookes selle.
"Now help, Thomas, for him who despoiled hell of its captives!	"Now help, Thomas, for hym that harwed helle!
By God, we owe forty pounds for stones.	By God, we owen fourty pound for stones.
There is not a tile yet within our dwelling.	Nys nat a tyle yet withinne oure wones.
Is finished, nor of our pavement	Parfourned is, ne of our pavement
Have been our food, our cloister to erect.	Hath been oure foode, our cloystre for to reyse.
When other men have been full well at ease,	Whan othere men han ben ful wel at eyse,
Said he, "for many a mussel and many an oyster,	Quod he, "for many a muscle and many an oystre,
"Give me then of thy gold, to make our cloister,"	"Yif me thanne of thy gold, to make oure cloystre,"
"Unless I so wish, out of my humility."	"But if me list, of myn humylitee."
It needs no more to speak of it," says he,	Nedeth namoore to speken of it," seith he,
I have him told completely all my condition;	I have hym toold hoolly al myn estat;
I have been shriven this day by my curate.	I have be shryven this day at my curat.
"Nay," said the sick man, "by Saint Symoun!	"Nay," quod the sike man, "by Seint Symoun!
Thine anger causes thee all too sorely to suffer --	Thyn angre dooth thee al to soore smerte --
Hold not the devil's knife always at thy heart --	Hoold nat the develes knyf ay at thyn herte --
Thou shalt me find as true as is a carpenter's square.	Thou shalt me fynde as just as is a squyre.
"Now, Thomas, dear brother, leave thine ire;	"Now, Thomas, leeve brother, lef thyn ire;
Lest thee repent;' I will no further say.	Lest thee repente;' I wol no ferther seye.
Nor with no enraged man walk by the way,	Ne with no wood man walke by the weye,
`Be no fellow to an angry man,	`Ne be no felawe to an irous man,
Lo, what said he who so well can teach?	Lo, what seyde he that so wel teche kan?
That women could wade it everywhere.	That wommen myghte wade it over al.
When he went to conquer Babylon.	Whan that he wente Babiloigne to wynne.
Because a horse of his was drowned therein,	For that an hors of his was dreynt therinne,
How he destroyed the river of Gysen,	How he destroyed the ryver of Gysen,
"Lo angry Cyrus, that Persian,	"Lo irous Cirus, thilke Percien,
But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.	But nat to a lord, thogh he sholde go to helle.
To a poor man one should tell his vices,	To a povre man men sholde his vices telle,
Unless it be unto a poor man.	But if it be unto a povre man.
Sing 'I shall please' and `I shall, if I can,'	Syngeth Placebo and `I shal, if I kan,'
Beware, therefore, how you act with lords.	Beth war, therfore, with lordes how ye pleye.
Why should I tell the answer of the knight?	What sholde I telle th' answere of the knyght?
Has wine bereft me of my eyesight?'	Hath wyn bireved me myn eyen sight?'
Said he; `Is all my power and mind gone?	Quod he; `Is al my myght and mynde agon?
`Now tell me whether I have a sure hand or not?'	`Now wheither have I a siker hand or noon?'
And with an arrow he slew the child right there.	And with an arwe he slow the child right there.
And up the string he pulled to his ear,	And up the streng he pulled to his ere,
And suddenly he took his bow in hand,	And sodeynly he took his bowe in honde,
Commanding him he should before him stand.	Comandynge hym he sholde bifore hym stonde.
Had this knight's son fetched before him,	Leet this knyghtes sone bifore hym fecche,
By a hundred times, than he had done before;	An hondred part, than he hadde don bifoore;
And for spite he drank very much more,	And for despit he drank ful muchel moore,
Of hand nor foot, nor of my eyesight.'	Of hand ne foot, ne of myne eyen sight.'
There is no wine that deprives me of my power	Ther is no wyn bireveth me my myght
That wine does to folk no such offence.	That wyn ne dooth to folk no swich offence.
And prove it by thy own experience,	And preve it by thyn owene experience,
"`The reverse shalt thou see,' said he, `right now,	"`The revers shaltou se,' quod he, `anon,
His mind and also his limbs every one.'	His mynde and eek his lymes everichon.'
Wine makes man to lose wretchedly	Wyn maketh man to lesen wrecchedly
Watching a lord, and he knows not where.	Awaityng on a lord, and he noot where.
There is full many an eye and many an ear	Ther is ful many an eye and many an ere
Of any man, and especially in a lord.	Of any man, and namely in a lord.
And drunkenness is also a foul reputation	And dronkenesse is eek a foul record
"`A lord is lost, if he be vicious;	"`A lord is lost, if he be vicius;
Said on a day betwixt them two right thus:	Seyde on a day bitwix hem two right thus:
Who loved virtuous morality	That loved vertuous moralitee
And as it happened, a lord of his household	And so bifel, a lord of his meynee
And it always delighted him to be a scoundrel.	And ay delited hym to been a shrewe.
And thus he caused them all three to be slain.	And thus he dide doon sleen hem alle thre.
`Thou hast not done what I commanded thee.'	`Thou hast nat doon that I comanded thee.'
And to the third knight right thus he says,	And to the thridde knyght right thus he seith,
For thou art the cause why thy fellow dies.'	For thou art cause why thy felawe deyth.'
And thou also must of necessity lose thy head,	And thou also most nedes lese thyn heed,
`I condemned thee; thou must therefore be dead.	`I dampned thee; thou most algate be deed.
And to the first knight right thus spoke he,	And to the firste knyght right thus spak he,
That is to say, both one, and two, and three!'	That is to seyn, bothe oon, and two, and thre!'
`You shall be dead,' said he, `as I may thrive!	`Ye shul be deed,' quod he, `so moot I thryve!
They said, `Lord, the knight has not slain	They seiden, `Lord, the knyght ne hath nat slayn
To lead them both to the judge again.	To lede hem bothe to the juge agayn.
Then thought they it would be the best plan	Thanne thoughte they it were the beste reed
The knight came who men believed had been dead.	The knyght cam which men wenden had be deed.
Toward the place where he should die,	Toward the place ther he sholde deye,
And it happened, as they went by the way	And happed, as they wente by the weye
`Go lead him to the death, I charge thee.'	`Go lede hym to the deeth, I charge thee.'
And to another knight commanded he,	And to another knyght comanded he,
For which I condemn thee to the death, certainly.'	For which I deme thee to the deeth, certayn.'
At once the knight is brought before the judge,	Anon the knyght bifore the juge is broght,
That one of them came home, that other did not.	That oon of hem cam hoom, that oother noght.
And as Fortune would that it were so,	And as Fortune wolde that it were so,
Upon a day out rode two knights,	Upon a day out ryden knyghtes two,
As says Seneca, who, during his reign,	As seith Senek, that, durynge his estaat,
"Once there was an angry potentate,	"Whilom ther was an irous potestat,
To set an angry man in high position.	To sette an irous man in heigh degree.
It is great harm and certainly great pity	It is greet harm and certes greet pitee
An angry man, God send him little power!	An irous man, God sende hym litel myght!
My tale should last until to-morrow.	My tale sholde laste til to-morwe.
I could of ire say so much sorrow,	I koude of ire seye so muche sorwe,
Ire is, in truth, executor of pride.	Ire is, in sooth, executour of pryde.
Can say, how ire engenders homicide.	Kan seye, how ire engendreth homycide.
This every ignorant vicar or parson	This every lewed viker or person
And to himself it is destruction.	And to hymself it is destruccion.
Abominable unto the God of heaven;	Abhomynable unto the God of hevene;
Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven,	Ire is a synne, oon of the grete of sevene,
Vengeance is then all that they desire.	Vengeance is thanne al that they desire.
When man treads on his tail, nor half so fierce,	Whan man tret on his tayl, ne half so fel,
There is, indeed, no serpent so cruel,	Ther nys, ywys, no serpent so cruel,
Why do you need, Thomas, to make strife?	What nedeth yow, Thomas, to maken stryf?
Now since you have so holy meek a wife,	Now sith ye han so hooly meke a wyf,
For striving with their sweethearts and their wives.	For stryvyng with hir lemmans and hir wyves.
That twenty thousand men have lost their lives	That twenty thousand men han lost hir lyves
Beware, my son, and hearken patiently	Be war, my sone, and herkne paciently
Under the grass and stings subtly.	Under the gras and styngeth subtilly.
Beware of the serpent that so slyly creeps	War fro the serpent that so slily crepeth
And, Thomas, yet again I command thee,	And, Thomas, yet eft-soones I charge thee,
Nor make thy acquaintances to flee.'	Ne make thyne aqueyntances nat to flee.'
To thy subjects do no oppression,	To thy subgitz do noon oppression,
`Within thy house be thou no lion;	`Withinne thyn hous ne be thou no leon;
Concerning such thing, lo, what the wise man says:	Touchynge swich thyng, lo, what the wise seith:
And bear this word away now, by thy faith;	And ber this word awey now, by thy feith;
Strive not with thy wife, for thine own good;	Ne stryve nat with thy wyf, as for thy beste;
And therefore, Thomas, believe me if thou wish,	And therfore, Thomas, trowe me if thee leste,
Your wife, who is so meek and patient.	Youre wyf, that is so meke and pacient.
With which the devil set your heart afire,	With which the devel set youre herte afyre,
You lie here full of anger and of ire,	Ye lye heere ful of anger and of ire,
If it be good in the life of Thomas of India.	If it be good in Thomas lyf of Inde.
Concerning building up of churches you can find	Of buyldynge up of chirches may ye fynde
Thomas, if you want to learn what to do,	Thomas, if ye wol lernen for to wirche,
And to build Christ's own church.	And for to buylden Cristes owene chirche.
To pray for you is always so diligent,	To preye for yow is ay so diligent,
For myself, but because all our convent	As for myself, but that al oure covent
Thomas, I do not desire any of your treasure	Thomas, noght of youre tresor I desire
The high God, who all this world has wrought,	The hye God, that al this world hath wroght,
Thou wouldest have our labor all for nothing.	Thou woldest han oure labour al for noght.
Thomas, by me thou shalt not be flattered;	Thomas, of me thou shalt nat been yflatered;
Is more strong than when it is all scattered.	Is moore strong than whan it is toscatered.
Lo, each thing that is united in itself	Lo, ech thyng that is oned in himselve
What is a farthing worth divided into twelve?	What is a ferthyng worth parted in twelve?
Nay, nay, Thomas, it may in no way be so!	Nay, nay, Thomas, it may no thyng be so!
A, give that friar a penny, and let him go!	A, yif that frere a peny, and lat hym go!
A, give that convent four and twenty groats (four pences)!	A, yif that covent foure and twenty grotes!
Your malady is because we have too little.	Youre maladye is for we han to lyte.
Thomas, that trick is not worth a half a farthing.	Thomas, that jape nys nat worth a myte.
To be insufficient to pray for you?	To praye for yow been insufficient?
Consider you then me, or else our convent,	Holde ye thanne me, or elles oure covent,
Your inconstancy is your ruin.	Youre inconstance is youre confusioun.
To seek other physicians in the town?	To sechen othere leches in the toun?
Why does one who has a perfect physician need	What nedeth hym that hath a parfit leche
Why do you need to seek various friars?	What nedeth yow diverse freres seche?
The friar answered, "Oh Thomas, dost thou so?	The frere answerde, "O Thomas, dostow so?
Certainly, I have almost spent all my goods.	Certeyn, my good have I almoost biset.
Very many a pound; yet fare I never the better.	Ful many a pound; yet fare I never the bet.
Have spent upon different sorts of friars	Have spent upon diverse manere freres
So help me Christ, I in few years,	As help me Crist, as I in fewe yeres,
"God knows," said he, "no thing thereof feel I!	"God woot," quod he, "no thyng therof feele I!
Thy body to move with ease hastily."	Thy body for to weelden hastily."
To Christ, that he send thee health and strength	To Crist, that he thee sende heele and myght
In our assembly we pray day and night	In our chapitre praye we day and nyght
Were thou not our brother, thou shouldest not thrive.	Nere thou oure brother, sholdestou nat thryve.
Thomas, Thomas! As I may ride or walk,	Thomas, Thomas! So moote I ryde or go,
Make their upward flight to God's two ears.	Maken hir sours to Goddes eres two.
Of charitable and chaste busy friars	Of charitable and chaste bisy freres
Up springs into the' air, right so prayers	Up springeth into th' eir, right so prayeres
Therefore, just as a hawk upon an upward flight	Therfore, right as an hauk up at a sours
Workers of God's word, not mere listeners?	Werkeris of Goddes word, nat auditours?
But we who are humble, and chaste, and poor,	But we that humble been, and chaast, and poore,
Who follows Christ's gospel and his path,	Who folweth Cristes gospel and his foore,
Lo, `buf!' they say (belch), `my heart has uttered' (a good word)!	Lo, `buf!' they seye, `cor meum eructavit!'
Their prayer is of full great reverence,	Hir preyere is of ful greet reverence,
As full of wine as a bottle in the pantry.	Al vinolent as botel in the spence.
Fat as a whale, and waddling like a swan,	Fat as a whale, and walkynge as a swan,
"I think they are like Jovinian,	"Me thynketh they been lyk Jovinyan,
And for their ignorance I scorn them.	And for hir lewednesse I hem diffye.
Fie on their pomp and on their gluttony!	Fy on hire pompe and on hire glotonye!
Or theirs who swim in possessions.	Or hirs that swymmen in possessioun.
Whether it is more like our profession,	Wher it be likker oure professioun,
And so forth all the gospel may you see,	And so forth al the gospel may ye seen,
Spoke this about friars, when he said thus:	Spak this by freres, whan he seyde thus:
That especially our sweet Lord Jesus	That specially oure sweete Lord Jhesus
But I shall find it in some sort of gloss (interpretation),	But I shal fynde it in a maner glose,
I have no text for it, as I suppose,	I ne have no text of it, as I suppose,
"But hearken now, Thomas, what I shall say.	"But herkne now, Thomas, what I shal seyn.
And chaste was man in Paradise, certainly.	And chaast was man in Paradys, certeyn.
Was man chased out for his gluttony;	Was man out chaced for his glotonye;
From Paradise first, if I shall not lie,	Fro Paradys first, if I shal nat lye,
Than yours, with your feasts at the table.	Than youres, with youre feestes at the table.
I speak of us, we mendicants, we friars --	I speke of us, we mendynantz, we freres --
And therefore may you see that our prayers --	And therfore may ye se that oure preyeres --
To weeping, charity, and purity.	To wepynge, misericorde, and clennesse.
To persecution for righteousness,	To persecucioun for rightwisnesse,
To charity, humility, and abstinence,	To charite, humblesse, and abstinence,
Are wedded to poverty and chastity,	Been wedded to poverte and continence,
Therefore we mendicants, we innocent friars,	Therfore we mendynantz, we sely freres,
Gave us an example of fasting and prayers.	Yaf us ensample of fastynge and preyeres.
"Our Lord Jesus, as holy writ devises,	"Oure Lord Jhesu, as hooly writ devyseth,
Unless they are sober who for the people pray,	But they be sobre that for the peple preye,
Lest they died. Take heed what I say!	Lest that they deyden. Taak heede what I seye!
But there in abstinence pray and keep vigil,	But there in abstinence preye and wake,
Any drink which might make them drunk,	No drynke which that myghte hem dronke make,
They would not drink in any sort of way	They nolden drynken in no maner wyse
To pray for the people and do service,	To preye for the peple and do servyse,
Into the temple when they should go	Into the temple whan they sholde gon
And also the other priests every one,	And eek the othere preestes everichon,
"Aaron, who had the temple in governance,	"Aaron, that hadde the temple in governaunce,
With high God, who is our life's physician,	With hye God, that is oure lyves leche,
In mount Horeb, before he had any speech	In mount Oreb, er he hadde any speche
With God's finger; and Elijah, you know well,	With Goddes fynger; and Elye, wel ye witen,
Received he the law that was written	Receyved he the lawe that was writen
With empty belly, fasting many a day,	With empty wombe, fastynge many a day,
Spoke with him in the mountain of Sinai.	Spak with hym in the mountayne of Synay.
Fasted, before the high God of might	Fasted, er that the heighe God of myght
"Lo, Moses forty days and forty nights	"Lo, Moyses fourty dayes and fourty nyght
Makes that Christ accepts our prayers.	Maketh that Crist accepteth oure preyeres.
Suffice us, though they are not full good.	Suffisen us, though they be nat ful goode.
We fare as says the apostle; cloth and food	We fare as seith th' apostle; clooth and foode
And fatten his soul, and make his body lean.	And fatte his soule, and make his body lene.
Whoever will pray, he must fast and be pure,	Whoso wol preye, he moot faste and be clene,
And diverse rewards had they thereby.	And divers gerdon hadden they therby.
Lazar and Dives lived diversely,	Lazar and Dives lyveden diversly,
We hold this world's lust all in scorn.	We han this worldes lust al in despit.
Of food and drink, and in their foul delight.	Of mete and drynke, and in hir foul delit.
And secular folk in riches and expenditures	And burell folk in richesse and despence
Than secular folk, although they were kings.	Than burel folk, although they weren kynges.
And more we see of Christ's secret things,	And moore we seen of Cristes secree thynges,
Our prayers are more effectual,	Oure orisons been moore effectueel,
For, sir and lady, trust me right well,	For, sire and dame, trusteth me right weel,
Thanking him for his revelation.	Thankynge hym of his revelacion.
Except that to Christ I said a prayer,	Save that to Crist I seyde an orison,
Te Deum was our song, and nothing else,	Te Deum was oure song, and nothyng elles,
Without noise or clattering of bells;	Withouten noyse or claterynge of belles;
With many a tear tricking on my cheek,	With many a teere trillyng on my cheke,
Make their fiftieth anniversary and walk alone.	Maken hir jubilee and walke allone.
They may now -- God be thanked of his grace! --	They may now -- God be thanked of his loone! --
That have been true friars fifty years;	That han been trewe freres fifty yeer;
So did our sacristan and the head of our infirmary,	So dide oure sexteyn and oure fermerer,
In my vision, as God may guide me!	In myn avision, so God me wisse!
After his death, I saw him carried up to bliss	After his deeth, I saugh hym born to blisse
I dare well say that, before half an hour	I dar wel seyn that, er that half an hour
Said this friar, "at home in our dormitory.	Seide this frere, "at hoom in oure dortour.
"His death saw I by revelation,"	"His deeth saugh I by revelacioun,"
My child is dead within these weeks two,	My child is deed withinne thise wykes two,
"Now, sir," said she, "but one word before I go.	"Now, sire," quod she, "but o word er I go.
By God! I would not tell it but to a few."	By God! I wolde nat telle it but a fewe."
Though I so friendly show you my private affairs.	Though I so freendly yow my conseil shewe.
I pray you, lady, that you be not annoyed,	I prey yow, dame, ye be nat anoyed,
To staying awake (to pray), that my stomach is destroyed.	To wake, that my stomak is destroyed.
The body is always so ready and accustomed	The body is ay so redy and penyble
My spirit has its nourishment in the Bible.	My spirit hath his fostryng in the Bible.
I am a man who needs little sustenance;	I am a man of litel sustenaunce;
But that I would that no beast for me were dead --	But that I nolde no beest for me were deed --
And after that a roasted pig's head --	And after that a rosted pigges heed --
And of your soft breed nothing but a sliver,	And of youre softe breed nat but a shyvere,
Have I of a capon only the liver,	Have I nat of a capon but the lyvere,
"Now, lady," said he, "now I tell you without doubt	"Now, dame," quod he, "now je vous dy sanz doute,
What will you dine? I will go work on that."	What wol ye dyne? I wol go theraboute."
"Now, master," said the wife, "before I go,	"Now, maister," quod the wyf, "er that I go,
And thereof will I speak a word or two."	And therof wol I speke a word or two."
Ire is a thing that high God forbad,	Ire is a thyng that hye God defended,
"Oh Thomas, I tell you, Thomas! Thomas!	"O Thomas, je vous dy, Thomas! Thomas!
I can not please him in any sort of way."	I may nat plese hym in no maner cas."
Other pleasure right none of him have I;	Oother desport right noon of hym have I;
He groans like our boor, that lies in our sty.	He groneth lyk oure boor, lith in oure sty.
And over him lay my leg or my arm,	And over hym leye my leg outher myn arm,
Though I cover him at night and make him warm,	Though I hym wrye a-nyght and make hym warm,
Though he have all that he can desire;	Though that he have al that he kan desire;
He is as angry as a pismire,	He is as angry as a pissemyre,
"Chide him well, for the Holy Trinity!	"Chideth him weel, for seinte Trinitee!
To spread his word is set all my intention."	To sprede his word is set al myn entente."
To pay Jesus Christ his proper income;	To yelden Jhesu Crist his propre rente;
I walk and fish Christian men's souls	I walke and fisshe Cristen mennes soules
And study in Peter's words and in Paul's.	And studie in Petres wordes and in Poules.
In confession; in preaching is my diligence,	In shrift; in prechyng is my diligence,
To examine gently a conscience	To grope tendrely a conscience
These curates are very negligent and slow	Thise curatz been ful necligent and slowe
I will with Thomas speak a little while.	I wole with Thomas speke a litel throwe.
I would pray you that you be not annoyed,	I wolde prey yow that ye nat yow greve,
"Great thanks, lady, this have I found always.	"Graunt mercy, dame, this have I founde alwey.
"At any rate, welcome are you, by my faith!"	"Algates, welcome be ye, by my fey!"
"Yes, God correct my faults, sir," said she.	"Ye, God amende defautes, sire," quod she.
In all the church, as God may save me!"	In al the chirche, God so save me!"
Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife	Yet saugh I nat this day so fair a wyf
Thanked be God, who gave you soul and life!	Thanked be God, that yow yaf soule and lyf!
As he who is your servant every bit,	As he that is youre servant every deel,
With his lips: "Lady," said he, "right well,	With his lyppes: "Dame," quod he, "right weel,
And kissed her sweetly, and chirps like a sparrow	And kiste hire sweete, and chirketh as a sparwe
The friar arises up full courteously,	The frere ariseth up ful curteisly,
Said this wife, "How fare you, cordially (I ask)?"	Seyde this wyf, "How fare ye, hertely?"
"Ey, master, welcome are you, by Saint John!"	"Ey, maister, welcome be ye, by Seint John!"
Said this man, "and she will come anon."	Seyde this man, "and she wol come anon."
"Yonder in the yard I believe that she be,"	"Yond in the yerd I trowe that she be,"
And there I saw our lady -- Ah! Where is she?"	And there I saugh oure dame -- A! Where is she?"
And spend their goods where it is reasonable;	And spende hir good ther it is resonable;
There have I taught them to be charitable,	There have I taught hem to be charitable,
For letter slays, so we clerks say --	For lettre sleeth, so as we clerkes seyn --
And therefore will I teach you all the interpretation.	And therfore wol I teche yow al the glose.
For it is hard for you, as I suppose,	For it is hard to yow, as I suppose,
Not entirely according to the text of holy writ,	Nat al after the text of hooly writ,
And said a sermon insofar as my simple wit allowed --	And seyd a sermon after my symple wit --
I have today been at your church at mass,	I have to day been at youre chirche at messe,
And for our other friends, God them bless!	And for oure othere freendes, God hem blesse!
Have I said many a precious prayer,	Have I seyd many a precious orison,
And especially for thy salvation	And specially for thy savacion
"God knows," said he, "labored I have very hard,	"God woot," quod he, "laboured I have ful soore,
"How have you fared since March began?	"How han ye fare sith that March bigan?
"Oh dear master," said this sick man,	"O deere maister," quod this sike man,
Where he intended that night to lie.	Where as he shoop hym thilke nyght to lye.
Forth with his knave, into that hostelry	Forth with his knave, into that hostelrye
His fellow had gone walking into town	His felawe was go walked into toun
And also his satchel, and set him softly down.	And eek his scrippe, and sette hym softe adoun.
And laid down his walking stick and his hat,	And leyde adoun his potente and his hat,
And from the bench he drove away the cat,	And fro the bench he droof awey the cat,
Here have I eaten many a merry meal."	Heere have I eten many a myrie meel."
"Thomas," said he, "God reward you! Very often	"Thomas," quod he, "God yelde yow! Ful ofte
Said this friar, courteously and soft.	Seyde this frere, curteisly and softe.
"God be here!" said he, "Oh Thomas, friend, good day!"	"Deus hic!" quod he, "O Thomas, freend, good day!"
Bedridden upon a couch low he lay.	Bedrede upon a couche lowe he lay.
Sick lay the good man whose the place is;	Syk lay the goode man whos that the place is;
Hospitably received more than in a hundred places.	Refresshed moore than in an hundred placis.
Came to a house where he was accustomed to be	Cam til an hous ther he was wont to be
So long he went, house by house, until he	So longe he wente, hous by hous, til he
"As I may thrive," said this Summoner, "so I shall!"	"So thryve I," quod this Somonour, "so I shal!"
"Quiet," said our Host, "for Christ's mother dear!	"Pees," quod oure Hoost, "for Cristes mooder deere!
"Nay, there thou lie, thou Summoner!" said the Friar.	"Nay, ther thou lixt, thou Somonour!" quod the Frere.
He served them with tricks and with falsehoods.	He served hem with nyfles and with fables.
That he before had written in his tables;	That he biforn had writen in his tables;
He planed away the names every one	He planed awey the names everichon
And when he was out at door, immediately	And whan that he was out at dore, anon
And what men gave them, laid it on his back.	And what men yaf hem, leyde it on his bak.
Who was their host's man, and bore a sack,	That was hir hostes man, and bar a sak,
A sturdy rascal went always behind them,	A sturdy harlot wente ay hem bihynde,
Our sister dear -- lo! Here I write your name --	Oure suster deere -- lo! Heere I write youre name --
A piece of your woolen cloth, dear lady,	A dagon of youre blanket, leeve dame,
Or give us some of your meat, if you have any;	Or yif us of youre brawn, if ye have eny;
A God's halfpenny, or a mass penny,	A Goddes halfpeny, or a masse peny,
Or else what you like, we may not choose;	Or elles what yow lyst, we may nat cheese;
A little cake, or a bit of cheese,	A Goddes kechyl, or a trype of chese,
"Give us a bushel of wheat, malt, or rye,	"Yif us a busshel whete, malt, or reye,
As if he would for them pray.	Ascaunces that he wolde for hem preye.
Of all folk that gave him any good thing,	Of alle folk that yaf hym any good,
And a writing instrument polished carefully,	And a poyntel polysshed fetisly,
A pair of tablets all of ivory,	A peyre of tables al of yvory,
His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,	His felawe hadde a staf tipped with horn,
And begs meal and cheese, or else grain.	And beggeth mele and chese, or elles corn.
In every house he began to peer and pry,	In every hous he gan to poure and prye,
With satchel and metal-tipped staff, his robe tucked up high,	With scrippe and tipped staf, ytukked hye,
He went his way; no longer would he stay.	He wente his wey; no lenger wolde he reste.
When folk in church had given him what they wished,	Whan folk in chirche had yeve him what hem leste,
With the prayer "who with the father" forth he went his way.	With qui cum patre forth his wey he wente.
Now speed you hastily, for Christ's sake!"	Now spede yow hastily, for Cristes sake!"
To be clawed, or to burn or bake.	To been yclawed, or to brenne or bake.
Very hard it is with flesh hook or with awls	Ful hard it is with flesshhook or with oules
Deliver out," said he, "immediately the souls!	Delivereth out," quod he, "anon the soules!
He sings not but one masse in a day.	He syngeth nat but o masse in a day.
Not to keep a priest jolly and gay --	Nat for to holde a preest joly and gay --
Yes, when they are hastily sung,	Ye, whan that they been hastily ysonge,
Their friends' souls, as well old as young --	Hir freendes soules, as wel olde as yonge --
"Masses for souls," said he, "deliver from penance	"Trentals," seyde he, "deliveren fro penaunce
As to beneficed clergymen, that may live,	As to possessioners, that mowen lyve,
Nor where it needs not to be given,	Ne ther it nedeth nat for to be yive,
Not where it is wasted and devoured,	Nat ther as it is wasted and devoured,
Where divine service is honored,	Ther as divine servyce is honoured,
The wherewithal that men might holy houses make,	Wherwith men myghte hooly houses make,
To masses for dead souls, and to give, for God's sake,	To trentals, and to yeve, for Goddes sake,
Excited he the people in his preaching	Excited he the peple in his prechyng
And specially, above every thing,	And specially, aboven every thyng,
Had preached at a church in his manner,	Hadde preched at a chirche in his manere,
To preach, and also to beg, it is no doubt.	To preche, and eek to begge, it is no doute.
In which there went a licensed beggar about	In which ther wente a lymytour aboute
A marshy country called Holdernesse,	A mersshy contree called Holdernesse,
Gentlemen, there is in Yorkshire, as I believe,	Lordynges, ther is in Yorkshire, as I gesse,
Here begins the Summoner's Tale.	Heere bigynneth the Somonour his Tale.
My prologue will I end in this manner."	My prologe wol I ende in this manere."
God save you all, except this cursed Friar!	God save yow alle, save this cursed Frere!
That is his true natural heritage.	That is his heritage of verray kynde.
So was the devil's ass always in his mind,	So was the develes ers ay in his mynde,
Unto his body again, and he awoke.	Unto his body agayn, and he awook.
His spirit God restored, by his grace,	His spirit God restored, of his grace,
Upon the torments of this sorry place,	Upon the tormentz of this sory place,
This friar, when he had looked his fill	This frere, whan he looked hadde his fille
He clapped his tail again and lay very still.	He clapte his tayl agayn and lay ful stille.
And in his ass they crept every one.	And in his ers they crepten everychon.
And came back again as fast as they can go,	And comen agayn as faste as they may gon,
And throughout hell swarmed all about,	And thurghout helle swarmed al aboute,
Twenty thousand friars in a crowd,	Twenty thousand freres on a route,
Just as bees swarm out from a hive,	Right so as bees out swarmen from an hyve,
And before half a furlong way of time (a few minutes),	And er that half a furlong wey of space,
Where the nest of friars is in this place!'	Where is the nest of freres in this place!'
`Show forth thy ass, and let the friar see	`Shewe forth thyn ers, and lat the frere se
Hold up thy tail, thou Satan!' said he;	Hold up thy tayl, thou Sathanas!' quod he;
Broader than of a large galleon is the sail.	Brodder than of a carryk is the sayl.
`And now has Satan,' says he, `a tail	`And now hath Sathanas,' seith he, `a tayl
And unto Satan he led him down.	And unto Sathanas he ladde hym doun.
`Yes' said this angel, `many a million!'	`Yis' quod this angel, `many a millioun!'
`Now, sir,' said he, `have friars such a grace	`Now, sire,' quod he, `han freres swich a grace
Unto this angel spoke the friar then:	Unto this angel spak the frere tho:
Of other folk he saw enough in woe.	Of oother folk he saugh ynowe in wo.
In all the place saw he not a friar;	In al the place saugh he nat a frere;
To show him the pains that were there,	To shewen hym the peynes that ther were,
And as an angel led him up and down,	And as an angel ladde hym up and doun,
In spirit once by a vision;	In spirit ones by a visioun;
How a friar was carried off to hell	How that a frere ravysshed was to helle
For, by God, you have often times heard tell	For, pardee, ye han ofte tyme herd telle
And God knows it, that it is little wonder;	And God it woot, that it is litel wonder;
This Friar boasts that he knows hell,	This Frere bosteth that he knoweth helle,
Now grant me that me I may tell my tale.	As suffreth me I may my tale telle.
Since you have heard this false Friar lie,	Syn ye han herd this false Frere lye,
I you beseech that, of your courtesy,	I yow biseke that, of youre curteisye,
"Gentlemen," said he, "but one thing I desire;	"Lordynges," quod he, "but o thyng I desire;
That like an aspen leaf he quaked for ire.	That lyk an aspen leef he quook for ire.
Upon this Friar his heart was so enraged	Upon this Frere his herte was so wood
This Summoner in his stirrups stood high;	This Somonour in his styropes hye stood;
Here ends Chaucer's Tale of Melibee and Dame Prudence.	Heere is ended Chaucers Tale of Melibee and of Dame Prudence.
and bring us to the bliss that never has end." Amen.	and bryngen us to the blisse that nevere hath ende." Amen.
that he will forgive us our guilts	that he wole foryeven us oure giltes
he is so free and so merciful	he is so free and so merciable
in the sight of our Lord God,	in the sighte of oure Lord God,
For doubtless, if we are sorry and repentant of the sins and guilts which we have trespassed	For doutelees, if we be sory and repentant of the synnes and giltes which we han trespassed
that we have trespassed to him in this wretched world.	that we han trespassed to hym in this wrecched world.
will at the time of our dying forgive us our guilts	wole at the tyme of oure diynge foryeven us oure giltes
to this effect and to this end, that God of his endless mercy	to this effect and to this ende, that God of his endelees mercy
and forgive you completely all the offenses, injuries, and	and foryeve yow outrely alle the offenses, injuries, and
Wherefore I receive you to my grace	Wherfore I receyve yow to my grace
it constrains me to do you grace and mercy.	it constreyneth me to doon yow grace and mercy.
and that you are sorry and repentant of your guilts,	and that ye been sory and repentant of youre giltes,
yet forasmuch as I see and behold your great humility	yet for as muche as I see and biholde youre grete humylitee
you have misbehaved yourself and trespassed unto me,	ye have mysborn yow and trespassed unto me,
and folly, and of your negligence and ignorance,	and folie, and of youre necligence and unkonnynge,
"Although it be so that of your pride and high presumption	"Al be it so that of youre pride and heigh presumpcioun
he spoke unto them very goodly, and said in this manner:	he spak unto hem ful goodly, and seyde in this wyse:
that sent him a wife of so great discretion.	that hym sente a wyf of so greet discrecioun.
and thanked God, of whom proceeds all virtue and all goodness,	and thonked God, of whom procedeth al vertu and alle goodnesse,
and conformed him immediately and assented fully to work according to her advice,	and conformed hym anon and assented fully to werken after hir conseil,
his heart began to incline to the will of his wife, considering her true intent,	his herte gan enclyne to the wil of his wif, considerynge hir trewe entente,
dame Prudence, and her wise counsels and teachings,	dame Prudence, and hire wise informaciouns and techynges,
When Melibee had heard the great logical arguments and reasons of	Whanne Melibee hadde herd the grete skiles and resouns of
to him that has no mercy for another person.'"	to hym that hath no mercy of another wight.'"
For Saint James says in his Epistle: `Judgment without mercy shall be done	For Seint Jame seith in his Epistle: `Juggement withouten mercy shal be doon
to the effect and intent that God Almighty have mercy on you in his last judgment.	to th' effect and entente that God Almighty have mercy on yow in his laste juggement.
For Seneca says, `He overcomes in an evil manner who repents himself of his victory.'	For Senec seith, `He overcometh in an yvel manere that repenteth hym of his victorie.'
and that you have no cause to repent yourself of thing that you do.	and that ye have no cause to repente yow of thyng that ye doon.
and that men may have cause and matter to praise you for pity and for mercy,	and that men mowe have cause and mateere to preyse yow of pitee and of mercy,
in such a manner that your good name may be kept and conserved,	in swich a manere that youre goode name may be kept and conserved,
And I pray you that you will forbear now to do vengeance,	And I prey yow that ye wole forbere now to do vengeance,
as when he is gentle and meek, and calms himself easily.	as whan he is debonaire and meeke, and appeseth him lightly.'
And Cicero says, `There is no thing so commendable in a great lord	And Tullius seith, `Ther is no thyng so comendable in a greet lord
For Seneca says that `he that overcomes his heart overcomes twice.'	For Senec seith that `he that overcometh his herte overcometh twies.'
you endeavor to overcome your heart.	ye caste yow to overcome youre herte.
For it is written that `he who most courteously commands, to him men most obey.'	For it is writen that `he that moost curteisly comandeth, to hym men moost obeyen.'
this is to say, you must give more easy sentences and judgments.	this is to seyn, ye moste yeven moore esy sentences and juggementz.
And therefore, if you want men to do you obedience, you must judge more courteously;	And therfore, if ye wole that men do yow obeisance, ye moste deemen moore curteisly;
and then it would be likely to return to the war as it was before.	and thanne were it likly to retourne to the werre as it was biforn.
I say perhaps you could not put it to execution,	I seye ye mighte nat putten it to execucioun peraventure,
which I believe you can not do;	which I trowe ye mowe nat do;
And I assume (for the sake of argument) you might impose on them that punishment by justice and by law,	And I sette cas ye myghte enjoyne hem that peyne by right and by lawe,
the might and the power that is given him.'	the myght and the power that is yeven hym.'
And it is written that `he is worthy to lose his privilege that misuses	And it is writen that `he is worthy to lesen his privilege that mysuseth
that thinks me much against reason and out of measure,	that thynketh me muchel agayn resoun and out of mesure,
And as touching that you say you will exile your adversaries,	And as touchynge that ye seyn ye wole exile youre adversaries,
and passed, when it is not renewed nor restored.'	and passed, whan it is nat newed ne renovelled.'
For it is written that `the old good reputation or good name of a man is soon gone	For it is writen that `the olde good loos or good name of a man is soone goon
but he shall also strive always to do something by which he may renew his good name.	but he shal also enforcen hym alwey to do somthyng by which he may renovelle his good name.
And yet shall he not only busy himself in keeping of his good name,	And yet shal he nat oonly bisie hym in kepynge of his good name,
And every man ought to do his best efforts and his main concern to get himself a good name.	And everi man oghte to doon his diligence and his bisynesse to geten hym a good name.
for better it is to lose wealth with honor than it is to acquire wealth with villainy and shame.	for bettre it is to lesen good with worshipe than it is to wynne good with vileynye and shame.
than to take their wealth in this manner,	than for to taken of hir good in this manere,
For according to the saying of the word of the Apostle, `Greed is root of all harms.'	For after the sawe of the word of the Apostle, `Coveitise is roote of alle harmes.'
which is a vicious thing, and ought to be shunned by every good man.	which is a vicious thyng, and oghte been eschued of every good man.
and you might easily in this way get yourself a covetous name,	and ye myghte lightly in this wise gete yow a coveitous name,
For you are rich enough and have no need of other men's wealth,	For ye been riche ynough and han no nede of oother mennes good,
"Certainly," said dame Prudence, "this would be a cruel sentence and much again reason.	"Certes," quod dame Prudence, "this were a crueel sentence and muchel agayn resoun.
to dispossess them of all that ever they have and to put them in exile for ever."	to desherite hem of al that evere they han and for to putte hem in exil for evere."
To which Melibee answered and said, "Certainly," said he, "I think and purpose me fully	To which Melibee answerde and seyde, "Certes," quod he, "I thynke and purpose me fully
what vengeance he thought to take upon his adversaries.	what vengeance he thoughte to taken of his adversaries.
And when dame Prudence saw her time, she questioned and asked her lord Melibee	And whan that dame Prudence saugh hir tyme, she freyned and axed hir lord Melibee
to be done on them by the causes aforesaid.	to be doon on hem by the causes aforeseyd.
to accept and receive the sentence and judgment that Melibee would command	for to accepte and receyve the sentence and juggement that Melibee wolde comande
and assigned them a certain day to return unto his court	and assigned hem a certeyn day to retourne unto his court
and received their pledges and their bonds by their oaths upon their pledges and guarantors,	and receyved hire obligaciouns and hir boondes by hire othes upon hire plegges and borwes,
Then Melibee took them up from the ground very benignly,	Thanne Melibee took hem up fro the ground ful benignely,
although it be so that cursedly and damnably we have sinned against your high lordship."	al be it that cursedly and dampnablely we han agilt agayn youre heigh lordshipe."
stretch themselves farther into goodness than do our outrageous guilts and trespass into wickedness,	strecchen hem ferther into goodnesse than doon oure outrageouse giltes and trespas into wikkednesse,
For well we know that your liberal grace and mercy	For wel we knowe that youre liberal grace and mercy
and grant us forgiveness of our outrageous trespass and offense.	and graunten us foryevenesse of oure outrageous trespas and offense.
beseeching you that of your merciful pity	bisekynge yow that of youre merciable pitee
and are ready to obey all your commandments,	and been redy to obeie to alle youre comandementz,
we submit ourselves to the excellence and benignity of your gracious lordship,	we submytten us to the excellence and benignitee of youre gracious lordshipe,
But yet, for the great goodness and gentleness that all the world witnesses of your person,	But yet, for the grete goodnesse and debonairetee that al the world witnesseth of youre persone,
that truly we have deserved the death.	that trewely we han disserved the deeth.
and done wrong in such a way against your high lordship	and agilt in swich a wise agayn youre heigh lordshipe
For we have so greatly transgressed, and have offended	For we han so greetly mystaken us, and han offended
of so great a lord and so worthy as you are.	of so greet a lord and so worthy as ye been.
"Sir," said he, "we know well that we are unworthy to come unto the court	"Sire," quod he, "we knowen wel that we been unworthy to comen unto the court
of me and of my wife Prudence, or will you not?"	of me and of my wyf Prudence, or ye wol nat?"
whether you will put the punishment and the chastising and the vengeance of this outrage in the power	wheither ye wol putte the punyssement and the chastisynge and the vengeance of this outrage in the wyl
And therefore will I know and learn of you	And therfore wol I knowe and wite of yow
and have done such outrage that all men know well that you have deserved the death.	and have doon swich outrage that alle men knowen wel that ye have disserved the deeth.
For you have entered into my house by violence,	For ye han entred into myn hous by violence,
have done great injuries and wrongs to me and to my wife Prudence and to my daughter also.	han doon grete injuries and wronges to me and to my wyf Prudence and to my doghter also.
causeless and without logical explanation and reason,	causelees and withouten skile and resoun,
"It stands thus," said Melibee, "and true it is, that you,	"It standeth thus," quod Melibee, "and sooth it is, that ye,
And when they were come to the presence of Melibee, he said to them these words:	And whan they were comen to the presence of Melibee, he seyde hem thise wordes:
and took with them some of their true friends	and tooken with hem somme of hire trewe freendes
And right away they took their way to the court of Melibee,	And right anon they tooken hire wey to the court of Melibee,
and obey to the command of their lord Melibee.	 and obeye to the comandement of hir lord Melibee.
and prepared themselves without delay to go with the messengers	and shopen hem withouten delay to go with the messagers
yielding thanks and gratitude to their lord Melibee and to all his company,	yeldynge graces and thankynges to hir lord Melibee and to al his compaignye,
they were just glad and joyful, and answered very meekly and benignly,	they weren right glad and joyeful, and answereden ful mekely and benignely,
had heard what these messengers said unto them,	hadden herd what thise messagers seyden unto hem,
-- that is to say, the adversaries of Melibee --	-- that is to seyn, the adversaries of Melibee --
And when these trespassers and folk repenting of their follies	And whanne thise trespassours and repentynge folk of hire folies
that they prepare themselves without delay or tarrying to come unto us."	that they shape hem withouten delay or tariyng to comen unto us."
that if they will negotiate about peace and about harmony,	that if they wole trete of pees and of accord,
unto your adversaries, telling them on your behalf	unto youre adversaries, tellynge hem on youre bihalve
And therefore I advise that you send your messengers, such as are discrete and wise,	And therfore I conseille that ye sende youre messages, swiche as been discrete and wise,
and abide not nor delay it not till tomorrow.'	and abide nat ne delaye it nat til tomorwe.'
"There is an old proverb," said she, "which says that `the goodness that thou can do this day, do it,	"Ther is an old proverbe," quod she, "seith that `the goodnesse that thou mayst do this day, do it,
she was wonderfully glad in her heart and said:	she was wonderly glad in hire herte and seyde:
agree with her will and her intention,	accorde with hire wille and hire entencioun,
And when dame Prudence had heard the assent of her lord Melibee, and the advice of his friends	And whan dame Prudence hadde herd the assent of hir lord Melibee, and the conseil of his freendes
they gave unqualified advice to have peace and rest,	they yave ful conseil for to have pees and reste,
and had examined it by great effort and greet diligence,	and hadden examyned it by greet bisynesse and greet diligence,
And when Melibee's friends had taken her counsel and deliberation on the foresaid matter,	And whan Melibees freendes hadde taken hire avys and deliberacioun of the forseide mateere,
and prayed them that they would give their counsel and advice what best were to do in this urgent matter.	and preyden hem that they wolde yeven hire avys and conseil what best were to doon in this nede.
as it is above expressed and declared,	as it is aboven expressed and declared,
and told them in detail in the presence of Melibee all this matter	and tolde hem by ordre in the presence of Melibee al this mateere
and for her old friends which that were true and wise,	and for hire olde freendes which that were trewe and wyse,
And then dame Prudence without delay or tarrying sent immediately her messages for her kin	And thanne dame Prudence withouten delay or tariynge sente anon hire messages for hire kyn
to be unbound by him who bound it.'"	to be unbounde by hym that it was ybounde.'"
just so without their advice shall you not reconcile yourself nor have peace with your adversaries.	right so withouten hire conseil shul ye nat accorden yow ne have pees with youre adversaries.
you have been stirred to avenge yourself and make war,	ye han been stired to venge yow and maken werre,
for just as by the advice, assent, and help of your friends	for right as by the conseil, assent, and help of youre freendes
"Certainly, sir," said she, "you have well and goodly answered,	"Certes, sire," quod she, "ye han wel and goodly answered,
Then was Prudence very glad and joyful and said:	Thanne was Prudence right glad and joyeful and seyde:
but it is good that we do it not without the assent and will of our friends."	but it is good that we do it nat withouten the assent and wyl of oure freendes."
[it is worthy of having remission].' And therefore I assent and resolve myself to have peace;	[it is worthy remissioun].' And therfore I assente and conferme me to have pees;
And he says in another place that `he who has shame of his sin and acknowledges	And he seith in another place that `he that hath shame of his synne and knowlecheth
for confession is neighbor to innocence.	for confessioun is neighebor to innocence.
but acknowledges it and repents himself, asking indulgence.	but knowelecheth it and repenteth hym, axinge indulgence.
and forgiveness of his sin, who does not excuse his sin	and foryifnesse of his synne, that excuseth nat his synne
Then said Melibee: "He is well worthy to have pardon	Thanne seyde Melibee: "He is wel worthy to have pardoun
requesting and praying him of mercy and pity.	requirynge and preiynge hym of mercy and pitee.
acknowledging very lowly their sins and trespass, and how they were ready to suffer any punishment,	knowelechynge ful lowely hir synnes and trespas, and how they were redy to suffren all peyne,
and she returned to her lord Melibee, and told him how she found his adversaries very repentant,	and she retourned to hir lord Melibee, and tolde hym how she foond his adversaries ful repentant,
When dame Prudence had heard the answers of these men, she bad them go again secretly;	Whan dame Prudence hadde herd the answeres of thise men, she bad hem goon agayn prively;
that we may fulfill the will of you and of my lord Melibee."	that we mowe fulfille the wille of yow and of my lord Melibee."
to make our pledge and bond as strong as it pleases unto your goodness,	for to maken oure obligacioun and boond as strong as it liketh unto youre goodnesse,
and our goods all fully in your will and power,	and oure goodes al fully in youre wil and disposicioun,
Then said they with one voice, "Worshipful lady, we put us	Thanne seyden they with o voys, "Worshipful lady, we putten us
you shall be reconciled unto us."	ye shul been reconsiled unto us."
and I shall so work in this cause that by the grace of our Lord God	and I shal so werken in this cause that by the grace of oure Lord God
Furthermore I know well and am very sure that he shall do nothing in this urgent matter without my advice,	Forthermoore I knowe wel and am right seur that he shal nothyng doon in this nede withouten my conseil,
For there is nothing in this world that he desires, save only worship and honor.	For ther nys nothyng in this world that he desireth, save oonly worshipe and honour.
and in no way desirous nor covetous of goods nor riches.	and nothyng desirous ne coveitous of good ne richesse.
for I know well and know truly that he is gentle and humble, generous, courteous,	for I woot wel and knowe verraily that he is debonaire and meeke, large, curteys,
And nevertheless I advise you that you mistrust not my lord,	And nathelees I conseille you that ye mystruste nat my lord,
nor to his friend the control of his body,	ne to his freend the myght of his body,
Now since he forbids that a man should give to his brother	Now sithen he deffendeth that man sholde nat yeven to his broother
give thou never power (over) nor mastery of thy body while thou livest.'	ne yeve thou nevere myght ne maistrie of thy body whil thou lyvest.'
to thy son, to thy wife, to thy friend, nor to thy brother	to thy sone, to thy wyf, to thy freend, ne to thy broother
`you people, folk and governors of holy church,	`ye peple, folk and governours of hooly chirche,
For Solomon says, `Believe me, and give credence to what I shall say: I say,' said he,	For Salomon seith, `Leeveth me, and yeveth credence to that I shal seyn: I seye,' quod he,
and in the might and power of his enemies.	and in the myght and power of his enemys.
that a man put himself entirely in the power of decision and judgment,	that a man putte hym al outrely in the arbitracioun and juggement,
"Certainly," said Prudence, "it is a hard thing and very perilous	"Certes," quod Prudence, "it is an hard thyng and right perilous
to take such thought in this urgent matter that	to taken swich avysement in this nede that
And therefore, noble lady, we beseech to your womanly pity	And therfore, noble lady, we biseke to youre wommanly pitee
that he will impose on us such a punishment as we can not bear nor sustain.	that he wole enjoyne us swich a peyne as we mowe nat bere ne susteene.
But perhaps he has such heaviness and such wrath toward us because of our offense	But peraventure he hath swich hevynesse and swich wratthe to us-ward by cause of oure offense
And therefore we pledge and bind us and our friends to do all his will and his commandments.	And therfore we oblige and bynden us and oure freendes for to doon al his wyl and his comandementz.
so far that we are not of power to make his amends.	so ferforth that we be nat of power to maken his amendes.
for we consider and acknowledge that we have offended and grieved my lord Melibee out of measure,	for we consideren and knowelichen that we han offended and greved my lord Melibee out of mesure,
that it be pleasing unto your great goodness to fulfill in deed your goodly words,	that it lyke unto youre grete goodnesse to fulfillen in dede youre goodliche wordes,
And therefore, dear and benign lady, we pray you and beseech you as meekly as we know how and are able	And therfore, deere and benygne lady, we preien yow and biseke yow as mekely as we konne and mowen
"Certainly," said they, "we put our actions and all our matters and cause all wholly in your good will	"Certes," quod they, "we putten oure dede and al oure matere and cause al hoolly in youre goode wyl
and make scoundrels to be gentle and meek.'	 and maken shrewes to be debonaire and meeke.'
For he says that `sweet words multiply and increase friends	For he seith that `sweete wordes multiplien and encreescen freendes
Now see we well that the knowledge and the cunning of Solomon is very true.	Now se we wel that the science and the konnynge of Salomon is ful trewe.
that you of your great goodness have presented unto us.	ye of youre grete goodnesse have presented unto us.
but we ought to request it with great contrition and humility,	but we oghte requeren it with greet contricioun and humylitee,
for the reconciliation which we are not worthy to have in any manner,	for the reconsilynge which we been nat worthy to have in no manere,
according to the saying of David the prophet,	after the sawe of David the prophete,
"A, lady," said they, "you have showed unto us the blessing of sweetness,	"A, lady," quod they, "ye han shewed unto us the blessynge of swetnesse,
And when they heard the goodly words of dame Prudence,	And whan they herden the goodliche wordes of dame Prudence,
and unto her, and to her daughter.	and unto hire, and to hire doghter.
for the injury and wrong that they had done to Melibee her lord,	of the injurie and wrong that they hadden doon to Melibee hir lord,
and said to them in a goodly manner how that they ought to have great repentance	and seyde to hem in a goodly manere hou that hem oughten have greet repentaunce
and the great harms and perils that are in war,	and the grete harmes and perils that been in werre,
and showed wisely unto them the great goods that come of peace	and shewed wisely unto hem the grete goodes that comen of pees
And when she saw her time, she sent for these adversaries to come unto her into a private place	And whan she saugh hir tyme, she sente for thise adversaries to come unto hire into a pryvee place
thinking how she might bring this urgent matter unto a good conclusion and to a good end.	thinkinge how she myghte brynge this nede unto a good conclusioun and to a good ende.
Then dame Prudence, when she saw the good will of her husband, considered and pondered in herself,	Thanne dame Prudence, whan she saugh the goode wyl of hir housbonde, delibered and took avys in hirself,
"Dame," said Melibee, "do your will and your pleasure;	"Dame," quod Melibee, "dooth youre wil and youre likynge;
And then, when I know their will and their intent, I can advise you the more surely."	And thanne, whan I knowe hir wil and hire entente, I may conseille yow the moore seurely."
for they must not know that it is of your will or of your assent.	for they shul nat knowe that it be of youre wyl or of youre assent.
And I pray you let me speak with your adversaries in a private place,	And I prey yow lat me speke with youre adversaries in privee place,
he changes the hearts of the man's adversaries and constrains them to beseech him for peace and for grace.'	he chaungeth the hertes of the mannes adversaries and constreyneth hem to biseken hym of pees and of grace.'
For Solomon says, `When the condition of man is pleasant and pleasing to God,	For Salomon seith, `Whan the condicioun of man is plesaunt and likynge to God,
and make them fall at your feet, ready to do your will and your commandments.	and maken hem fallen at youre feet, redy to do youre wyl and youre comandementz.
And if you do as I tell you, God will send your adversaries unto you	And if ye do as I sey yow, God wol sende youre adversaries unto yow
to have this tribulation and suffering for your sins.	to have this tribulacioun and disese for youre synnes.
and are reconciled unto him and to his grace.	and beth reconsiled unto hym and to his grace.
"I advise you," said she, "above all things , that you make peace between God and you,	"I conseille yow," quod she, "aboven alle thynges, that ye make pees bitwene God and yow,
Then dame Prudence uncovered all her will to him and said,	Thanne dame Prudence discovered al hir wyl to hym and seyde,
Say shortly your will and your advice, and I am all ready to fulfill and perform it."	Seyeth shortly youre wyl and youre conseil, and I am al redy to fulfille and parfourne it."
so many fair reasons as you set forth and show to me.	so manye faire resouns as ye putten to me and shewen.
Then said Melibee, "I shall not know how to answer to	Thanne seyde Melibee, "I shal nat konne answere to
`the fool corrects and amends himself.'"	`the fool correcteth and amendeth hymself.'"
(that is to say by the sorry and heavy countenance of a man)	(that is to seyn by the sory and hevy contenaunce of a man)
`by the sorrowful visage of a man'	`by the sorweful visage of a man'
than he who supports him and praises him in his misdoing and laughs at his folly.'	than he that supporteth hym and preyseth hym in his mysdoynge and laugheth at his folye.'
showing him the outward appearance of wrath,	shewynge hym semblant of wratthe,
For Solomon says, `He is more worthy that reproves or chides a fool for his folly,	For Salomon seith, `He is moore worth that repreveth or chideth a fool for his folye,
Then said dame Prudence, "I make no outward appearance of wrath nor anger, but for your great advantage.	Thanne seide dame Prudence, "I make no semblant of wratthe ne anger, but for youre grete profit.
he shall find greater grace than he who deceives him by sweet words.'"	he shal fynde gretter grace than he that deceyveth hym by sweete wordes.'"
For Solomon says that `he that reproves him who does folly,	For Salomon seith that `he that repreveth hym that dooth folye,
I am the more obligated to love you and to praise you.	I am the moore holden to love yow and to preyse yow.
and if you reprove me for my folly,	and if ye repreve me of my folye,
But say and advise me as you like, for I am ready to do just as you will desire;	But seyeth and conseileth me as yow liketh, for I am redy to do right as ye wol desire;
and they that are wrathful know not well what they do nor what they say.	and they that been wrothe witen nat wel what they don ne what they seyn.
for you know well that I am angry and wrathful, and that is no wonder;	for ye knowe wel that I am angry and wrooth, and that is no wonder;
"Dame, I pray you that you be not displeased by things that I say,	"Dame, I prey yow that ye be nat displesed of thynges that I seye,
When Melibee had heard dame Prudence make the appearance of wrath, he said in this manner:	Whanne Melibee hadde herd dame Prudence maken semblant of wratthe, he seyde in this wise:
And Solomon says, `He that has over-hard a heart, at the last he shall have bad luck and suffer misfortune.'"	And Salomon seith, `He that hath over-hard an herte, atte laste he shal myshappe and mystyde.'"
For I know well that you are so hard-hearted that you will do nothing for me.	For I knowe wel that ye been so hard-herted that ye wol do no thyng for me.
Yet say I not that you should rather sue to your adversaries for peace than they should (offer peace) to you.	Yet seye I nat that ye shul rather pursue to youre adversaries for pees than they shuln to yow.
seek peace and follow it, as much as in thee is.'	seke pees and folwe it, as muchel as in thee is.'
And the prophet says, `Flee shrewdness and do goodness;	And the prophete seith, `Flee shrewednesse and do goodnesse;
For the wise man says, `The dissension begins by another man,	For the wise man seith, `The dissensioun bigynneth by another man,
and the reconciliation, I had not much mistaken me nor said amiss.	and the reconsiliacioun, I ne hadde nat muchel mystaken me ne seyd amys.
And yet if I had said that you should have brought about the peace	And yit if I hadde seyd that ye sholde han purchaced the pees
nor you, nor any other, can say never the contrary.	ne ye, ne noon oother, seyn nevere the contrarie.
as I do my own, and ever have done;	as I do myn owene, and evere have doon;
"Certainly, sir, with all due respect to you, I love your honor and your well-being	"Certes, sire, sauf youre grace, I love youre honour and youre profit
Then began dame Prudence to make the outward appearance of wrath and said:	Thanne bigan dame Prudence to maken semblant of wratthe and seyde:
so fares it by too great humility or meekness."	 so fareth it by to greet humylitee or mekenesse."
For just as men say that `over-great familiarity engenders contempt,'	For right as men seyn that `over-greet hoomlynesse engendreth dispreisynge,'
Will you then that I go and humble myself, and be subject to them, and beg them for mercy?	Wol ye thanne that I go and meke me, and obeye me to hem, and crie hem mercy?
nor they ask not to be reconciled.	ne they asken nat to be reconsiled.
and you see well that they neither require nor pray me for peace,	and ye se wel that they ne requeren ne preyen me nat of pees,
You know well that my adversaries have begun this debate and strife by their outrage,	Ye knowen wel that myne adversaries han bigonnen this debaat and bryge by hire outrage,
"A," said Melibee, "now see I well that you love not my honor nor my worthiness.	"A," quod Melibee, "now se I wel that ye loven nat myn honour ne my worshipe.
`Well happy and blessed are they that love and bring about peace, for they are called children of God.'"	`Wel happy and blessed been they that loven and purchacen pees, for they been called children of God.'"
And therefore said our Lord Jesus Christ to his apostles in this manner:	And therfore seyde oure Lord Jhesu Crist to his apostles in this wise:
that is in this world is unity and peace.	that is in this world is unytee and pees.
And you know well that one of the greatest and most excellent things	And ye knowen wel that oon of the gretteste and moost sovereyn thyng
For Saint James says in his Epistles that `by agreeent and peace the small riches wax great,	For Seint Jame seith in his Epistles that `by concord and pees the smale richesses wexen grete,
"Certainly," said she, "I advise you that you agree with your adversaries and that you have peace with them.	"Certes," quod she, "I conseille yow that ye accorde with youre adversaries and that ye have pees with hem.
but I have not yet heard your advice, how I shall do in this urgent matter."	but I have nat yet herd youre conseil, how I shal do in this nede."
that you have showed me, that the war not at all pleases you;	that ye han shewed me, that the werre liketh yow no thyng;
"I see well, dame Prudence, that by your fair words and by your reasons	"I see wel, dame Prudence, that by youre faire wordes and by youre resouns
After Dame Prudence had spoken in this manner, Melibee answered and said,	After that Dame Prudence hadde spoken in this manere, Melibee answerde and seyde,
For Solomon says, `He who loves peril shall fall in peril.'"	For Salomon seith, `He that loveth peril shal falle in peril.'"
insomuch as a man may goodly (do so).	in as muchel as a man may goodly.
and for there is great peril in war, therefore should a man flee and shun war,	and for ther is gret peril in werre, therfore sholde a man flee and eschue werre,
`The deeds of battles are subject to chance and in no way certain,	`The dedes of batailles been aventurouse and nothyng certeyne,
and as it is written in the second Book of Kings,	and as it is writen in the seconde Book of Kynges,
and happens another time that as soon is the great man slain as the little man;	and happeth outher while that as soone is the grete man slayn as the litel man;
And because in battles many perils befall,	And by cause that in batailles fallen manye perils,
therefore every man should greatly dread to begin wars.	therfore every man sholde greetly drede werres to bigynne.
God give him victory . . . or not, according to what Solomon says,	God yeve hym victorie . . . or not, in accordance with what Salomon seith,
And, dear sir, since there is no man certain if he be worthy that	And, deere sire, for as muchel as ther is no man certein if he be worthy that
but it comes from our Lord God of heaven.'	but it cometh from oure Lord God of hevene.'
for the victory of a battle comes not by the great number of people,	for the victorie of a bataile comth nat by the grete nombre of peple,
yet he comforted his little company, and said exactly in this way:	yet he reconforted his litel compaignye, and seyde right in this wise:
and a greater multitude of folk and stronger than was this people of Machabee,	and a gretter multitude of folk and strenger than was this peple of Machabee,
when he had to fight against his adversary who has a greater number	whan he sholde fighte agayn his adversarie that hadde a gretter nombre
And therefore Judas Machabeus, who was God's knight,	And therfore Judas Machabeus, which was Goddes knyght,
but it lies in the will and in the hand of our Lord God Almighty.	but it lith in the wyl and in the hand of oure Lord God Almyghty.
of the people, nor in the strength of man,	of the peple, ne in the vertu of man,
For the victory of battles that are in this world lies not in great number or multitude	For the victorie of batailles that been in this world lyth nat in greet nombre or multitude
in another manner have peace unto your honor and advantage.	in oother manere have pees unto youre worshipe and profit.
yet it is not suitable, nor is it any good, to begin war whereas you can	yet bihoveth it nat, ne it is nat good, to bigynne werre whereas ye mowe
And Solomon says that `the greater riches that a man has, the more spenders he has.'	And Salomon seith that `the gretter richesses that a man hath, the mo despendours he hath.'
for the richer that he is, the greater expenditures must he make, if he will have worship and victory.'	for the richer that he is, the gretter despenses moste he make, if he wole have worshipe and victorie.'
And therefore says a philosopher, `That man who desires and will continually have war, shall never have enough,	And therfore seith a philosophre, `That man that desireth and wole algates han werre, shal nevere have suffisaunce,
for they do not suffice to maintain wars.	for they ne suffisen noght werres to mayntene.
I advise you that you begin no war in trust of your riches,	I conseille yow that ye bigynne no werre in trust of youre richesses,
you will provoke war and battle.	ye wole moeve werre and bataille.
and I see well that for the trust that you have in your riches	and I se wel that for the trust that ye han in youre richesses
"Sir, now have I showed you how you shall do in getting riches, and how you shall use them,	"Sire, now have I shewed yow how ye shul do in getynge richesses, and how ye shullen usen hem,
and cares not though he keep not his good name, is but a cruel churl.	and rekketh noght though he kepe nat his goode name, nys but a crueel cherl.
And he that trusts himself so much in his good conscience	And he that trusteth hym so muchel in his goode conscience
that is to say, good conscience to thine own person inward and good reputation for thy neighbor outward.'	that is to seyn, good conscience to thyn owene persone inward and good loos for thy neighebor outward.'
and that is good conscience and good reputation;	and that is good conscience and good loos;
And therefore says Saint Austin that `there are two things that are necessary and needful,	And therfore seith Seint Austyn that `ther been two thynges that arn necessarie and nedefulle,
when a man loves and desires to have a good name.'	whan a man loveth and desireth to han a good name.'
And Cassiodorus says that `it is sign of a gentle heart	And Cassidore seith that `it is signe of a gentil herte
does his best efforts and effort to keep his good name.	ne dooth his diligence and bisynesse to kepen his goode name.
And certainly he should not be called a gentle man who after God and good conscience, all other things left aside,	And certes he sholde nat be called a gentil man that after God and good conscience, alle thynges left,
for it shall longer abide with thee than any treasure, be it never so precious.'	for it shal lenger abide with thee than any tresour, be it never so precious.'
And therefore he says in another place, `Do great diligence,' says Solomon,	And therfore he seith in another place, `Do greet diligence,' seith Salomon,
than to have great riches.'	than for to have grete richesses.'
For Solomon says that `better it is and more it avails a man to have a good name	For Salomon seith that `bettre it is and moore it availleth a man to have a good name
you must have great effort and greet diligence that your good name be always kept and conserved.	yow moste have greet bisynesse and greet diligence that youre goode name be alwey kept and conserved.
Afterward, in getting of your riches and in using of them,	Afterward, in getynge of youre richesses and in usynge of hem,
when sin is not in man's conscience.'	whan synne is nat in mannes conscience.'
And the wise man says, `The substance of a man is very good,	And the wise man seith, `The substance of a man is ful good,
we should have so great joy as when our conscience bears us good witness.'	we sholden have so greet joye as whan oure conscience bereth us good witnesse.'
And the Apostle says that `there is nothing in this world of which	And th' Apostle seith that `ther nys thyng in this world of which
And yet say I furthermore, that you should always do your business to get yourself riches,	And yet seye I ferthermoore, that ye sholde alwey doon youre bisynesse to gete yow richesses,
than to be held a scoundrel and have great riches.'	than to been holden a shrewe and have grete richesses.'
And the prophet says that `better it is to be a good man and have little good and treasure	And the prophete seith that `bettre it is to been a good man and have litel good and tresour
than to have much good and treasure and lose the love of his Lord God.'	than to have muchel good and tresour and lese the love of his Lord God.'
For after the word of Solomon, `It is better to have a little good with the love of God	For after the word of Salomon, `It is bettre to have a litel good with the love of God
that is your creator and maker.	that is youre creatour and makere.
and for no riches you shall do any thing which may in any manner displease God,	and for no richesse ye shullen do no thyng which may in any manere displese God,
First, you shall have God in your heart,	First, ye shul have God in youre herte,
(that is to say, our Lord God, conscience, and good name).	(that is to seyn, oure Lord God, conscience, and good name).
`Nor thy goods must not be so open to be every man's goods.'	`ne thy goodes shullen nat been so opene to been every mannes goodes.'
(that is to say, to give part to them that have great need),	(that is to seyn, to yeven part to hem that han greet nede),
but that they might not be opened by pity and graciousness'	but that they myghte been opened by pitee and debonairetee'
Therefore says Cicero: `The goods,' he says, `of thine house should not be hidden nor kept so close,	Therfore seith Tullius: `The goodes,' he seith, `of thyn hous ne sholde nat been hyd ne kept so cloos,
as well should you keep yourself and govern yourself in such a way that men do not call you foolishly generous.	as wel sholde ye kepe yow and governe yow in swich a wise who men calle yow nat fool-large.
And as well as you would shun to be called an avaricious man or miser,	And as wel as ye wolde eschewe to be called an avaricious man or chynche,
that the more it swallows the more desire it has to swallow and devour.'	that the moore it swelweth the moore desir it hath to swelwe and devoure.'
And therefore says Saint Austin that `the avaricious man is likened unto hell,	And therfore seith Seint Austyn that `the avaricious man is likned unto helle,
he shall nothing bear with him out of this world?	he shal no thyng bere with hym out of this world?
that all his wits can not separate him or depart him from his goods,	that alle hise wittes mowen nat disseveren hym or departen hym from his goodes,
And for what cause or reason he joins himself or he knits himself so fast unto his goods	And for what cause or enchesoun joyneth he hym or knytteth he hym so faste unto his goodes
For death is the end of every man in this present life.'	For deeth is the ende of every man as in this present lyf.'
and he knows well that by necessity he must die?	and knoweth wel that nedes moste he dye?
`For what reason and why buries a man his goods by his great avarice,	`Wherto and why burieth a man his goodes by his grete avarice,
For a wise man reproves the avaricious man, and says thus in two verses:	For a wys man repreveth the avaricious man, and seith thus in two vers:
but that you have them in your power and in your control.	but that ye have hem in youre myght and in youre weeldynge.
using your riches in such a manner that men say not that your riches are buried	usynge youre richesses in swich manere that men seye nat that youre richesses been yburyed
I say then that you must flee avarice,	I seye thanne that ye shul fleen avarice,
for they who foolishly waste and squander the goods that they have,	for they that folily wasten and despenden the goodes that they han,
that is to say, spend them moderately,	that is to seyn, spende hem mesurably,
He says also, `The goods that thou hast gotten, use them by measure;'	He seith also, `The goodes that thou hast ygeten, use hem by mesure;'
for it is a great shame to a man to have a poor heart and a rich purse.'	for it is a greet shame to a man to have a povere herte and a riche purs.'
in such a manner that men have no reason nor cause to call thee neither wretch nor miser,	in swich a manere that men have no matiere ne cause to calle thee neither wrecche ne chynche,
And therefore says Cato: `Use,' he says, `thy riches that thou hast gotten	And therfore seith Caton: `Use,' he seith, `thy richesses that thou hast geten
in the same way is he to blame that spends over-generously.	in the same wise is he to blame that spendeth over-largely.
For just as men blame an avaricious man because of his niggardliness and miserliness,	For right as men blamen an avaricious man by cause of his scarsetee and chyncherie,
-- that is to say, over-generous a spender.	-- that is to seyen, over-large a spendere.
And afterward, you must use the riches which you have gotten by your wit and by your labor	And afterward, ye shul use the richesses which ye have geten by youre wit and by youre travaille
"Then thus in getting riches you must flee idleness.	"Thanne thus in getynge richesses ye mosten flee ydelnesse.
For the devil takes not easily unto his power such as he finds occupied in good works.	For the devel ne taketh nat lightly unto his werkynge swiche as he fyndeth occupied in goode werkes.
which is our enemy, not find you unoccupied.'	who is oure enemy, ne fynde yow nat unocupied.'
And therefore says Saint Jerome, `Do some good deeds that the devil,	And therfore seith Seint Jerome, `Dooth somme goode dedes that the devel,
for over-much rest nourishes and causes many vices.'	for over-muchel reste norisseth and causeth manye vices.'
For these causes says Cato, `Wake and incline you not over-much to sleep,	For thise causes seith Caton, `Waketh and enclyneth nat yow over-muchel for to slepe,
of the great cold, and in summer by reason of the great heat.'	of the grete coold, and in somer by enchesoun of the greete heete.'
For there is a versifier says that `the idle man excuses himself in winter because	For ther is a versifiour who seith that `the ydel man excuseth hym in wynter by cause
nor occupation shall fall into poverty and die for hunger.'	ne occupacioun shal falle into poverte and dye for hunger.'
but he that is idle and devotes himself to no business	but he that is ydel and casteth hym to no bisynesse
And the same Solomon says that `he that works and busies himself to till his land shall eat bread,	And the same Salomon seith that `he that travailleth and bisieth hym to tilien his land shal eten breed,
For Solomon says that `idleness teaches a man to do many evils.'	For Salomon seith that `ydelnesse techeth a man to do manye yveles.'
yet thou shalt not be idle nor slow to do thy benefit, for thou shalt in all ways flee idleness.'	yet shaltou nat been ydel ne slow to do thy profit, for thou shalt in alle wise flee ydelnesse.'
And though the great men and the mighty men get riches more easily than thou,	And though the grete men and the myghty men geten richesses moore lightly than thou,
nature as for a man to increase his own advantage to the harm of another man.	nature as a man to encressen his owene profit to the harm of another man.
that may happen to a man, is so much against	that may falle unto a man, is so muchel agayns
And Cicero says that `no sorrow, nor no dread of death, nor no thing	And Tullius seith that `no sorwe, ne no drede of deeth, ne no thyng
This is to say, that nature prohibits and forbids justly that	This is to seyn, that nature deffendeth and forbedeth by right that
For the law says that `there makes no man himself rich, if he does harm to another person.'	For the lawe seith that `ther maketh no man himselven riche, if he do harm to another wight.'
and that without doing wrong or harm to any other person.	and that withouten wrong or harm doynge to any oother persone.
And, sir, you shall get riches by your wit and by your travail unto your advantage,	And, sire, ye shul geten richesses by youre wit and by youre travaille unto youre profit,
but those riches that come little by little always grow and multiply.'	but that richesse that cometh litel and litel wexeth alwey and multiplieth.'
and easily go and pass from a man,	and lightly gooth and passeth fro a man,
He says also that `the riches that hastily come to a man soon	He seith also that `the richesse that hastily cometh to a man soone
and therefore says Solomon, `He that hastens him too busily to wax rich shall be no innocent.'	and therfore seith Salomon, `He that hasteth hym to bisily to wexe riche shal be noon innocent.'
first to theft, and to all other evils;	first to thefte, and to alle othere yveles;
"First, you shall get them without great desire, by good deliberation, slowly and not over-hastily.	"First, ye shul geten hem withouten greet desir, by good leyser, sokyngly and nat over-hastily.
in gathering of riches, and in what manner you shall use them.	in gaderynge of richesses, and in what manere ye shul usen hem.
And therefore will I show you how you should behave, and how you should bear yourself	And therfore wol I shewe yow hou ye shul have yow, and how ye shul bere yow
and to them that well use those riches.	and to hem that wel usen tho richesses.
I grant you that riches are good to them that get them well	I graunte yow that richesses been goode to hem that geten hem wel
By these reasons that I have said unto you and by many other reasons that I could say,	By thise resons that I have seid unto yow and by manye othere resons that I koude seye,
than to live in such a way.'	than for to lyven in swich wise.'
And as the same Solomon says, `Better it is to die of bitter death	And as the same Salomon seith, `Bettre it is to dye of bitter deeth
And says Solomon that `better it is to die than to have such poverty.'	And seith Salomon that `bet it is to dye than for to have swich poverte.'
for if he does not beg for his food, he dies for hunger;	for if he axe nat his mete, he dyeth for hunger;
`sorrowful and unfortunate is the condition of a poor beggar;	`sorweful and myshappy is the condicioun of a povre beggere;
and the same says Innocent in one of his books. He says that	and the same seith Innocent in oon of his bookes. He seith that
to eat the alms of his enemy,'	to eten the almesse of his enemy,'
when a man free by nature or by birth is constrained by poverty	whan a free man by kynde or of burthe is constreyned by poverte
And therefore says Petrus Alphonsus, `One of the greatest adversities of this world is	And therfore seith Piers Alfonce, `Oon of the gretteste adversitees of this world is
that is to say, the mother of overthrowing or falling down.	that is to seyn, the mooder of overthrowynge or fallynge doun.
And therefore Cassiodorus calls poverty the mother of ruin;	And therfore clepeth Cassidore poverte the mooder of ruyne;
for great poverty constrains a man to do many evils.	for greet poverte constreyneth a man to do manye yveles.
And just as by riches there come many goods,	And right so as by richesses ther comen manye goodes,
shall be made worthy and noble by riches.'	shullen been maad worthy and noble by the richesses.'
And yet says this Pamphilles moreover that `they that are enslaved and in bondage by birth	And yet seith this Pamphilles moreover that `they that been thralle and bonde of lynage
for thou shalt be alone without any company, except if it be the company of poor folk.'	for thou shalt be alloone withouten any compaignye, but if it be the compaignye of povre folk.'
And if thy fortune change that thou wax poor, farewell friendship and fellowship,	And if thy fortune change that thou wexe povre, farewel freendshipe and felaweshipe,
if thou be very rich -- thou shalt find a great number of fellows and friends.	if thou be right riche -- thou shalt fynde a greet nombre of felawes and freendes.
And this Pamphilles says also, `If thou be very happy -- that is to say,	And this Pamphilles seith also, `If thow be right happy -- that is to seyn,
for, of a thousand men, not one will forsake her nor refuse her.'	for, of a thousand men, oon wol nat forsaken hire ne refusen hire.'
she may choose of a thousand men which she will take to her husband,	she may chesen of a thousand men which she wol take to hir housbonde,
And by riches a man get can himself great friends.	And by richesses may a man gete hym grete freendes.
no more than it can live without temporal goods.	namoore may it lyve withouten temporeel goodes.
For just as the body of a man can not live without the soul,	For right as the body of a man may nat lyven withoute the soule,
and that riches are good to those that have well gotten them and well know how to use them.	and that the richesses been goode to hem that han wel ygeten hem and wel konne usen hem.
"Certainly, dear sir, I grant you that you are rich and mighty	"Certes, deere sire, I graunte yow that ye been riche and myghty
she spoke and said in this manner:	she spak and seyde in this wise:
and of his money, belittling the power of his adversaries,	and of his moneye, dispreisynge the power of his adversaries,
When Prudence had heard her husband boast of his riches	Whan Prudence hadde herd hir housbonde avanten hym of his richesse
And Solomon says that `all things obey to money.'"	And Salomon seith that `alle thynges obeyen to moneye.'"
and you well know that by money and by having great possessions	and wel knowen ye that by moneye and by havynge grete possessions
For I am richer and more mighty than my enemies are;	For I am richer and moore myghty than myne enemys been;
And, with all due respect to you, I can not see that it might greatly harm me though I took vengeance.	And, savynge youre grace, I kan nat seen that it myghte greetly harme me though I tooke vengeaunce.
And therefore, though I am angry and impatient, it is no marvel.	And therfore, though I be wrooth and inpacient, it is no merveille.
my grief and my suffering -- touches me very closely.	my grief and my disese -- toucheth me right ny.
But you know well that this deed -- that is to say,	But ye knowen wel that this dede -- that is to seyn,
with the quarrels of another man, whereas it pertains not unto him.	of the noyse of another man, wheras it aperteneth nat unto hym.
in just the same way it is reasonable that he have harm who by his impatience meddles himself	right in the same wise is it resoun that he have harm that by his inpacience medleth hym
For just as he that takes a strange hound by the ears is at another time bitten by the hound,	For right as he that taketh a straunge hound by the eris is outherwhile biten with the hound,
And Solomon says that `he that meddles with the quarrels or strife of another man	And Salomon seith that `he that entremetteth hym of the noyse or strif of another man
or meddles with such thing as pertains not unto him.'	or medleth with swych thyng as aperteneth nat unto hym.'
For the law says that `he is guilty that intrudes himself	For the lawe seith that `he is coupable that entremetteth hym
which touches him not and which pertains not unto him, though it harm him, it is no wonder.	that toucheth hym noght and that aperteneth nat unto hym, though it harme hym, it is no wonder.
"Certainly," said Melibee, "I grant you that when a man is impatient and angry with that	"Certes," quod Melibee, "I graunte yow that whan a man is inpacient and wrooth of that
`he that is not patient shall have great harm.'"	`he that is nat pacient shal have greet harm.'"
And therefore it seems to me that patience is good. For Solomon says that	And therfore me thynketh that pacience is good. For Salomon seith that
and so it follows that you have no will to do your deed temperately.	and so seweth it that ye han no wyl to do youre dede attemprely.
right now to defend yourself, but to avenge yourself;	as now for to deffende yow, but for to venge yow;
for otherwise it would be against reason.	for ellis were it agayn resoun.
that men have no cause nor matter to reprove him that defends himself from excess and outrage,	that men have no cause ne matiere to repreven hym that deffendeth hym of excesse and outrage,
And it is fitting that a man put so much temperance in his defense	And it bihoveth that a man putte swich attemperance in his deffense
to defend himself and not to avenge himself.	for to deffenden hym and nat for to vengen hym.
certainly you say truth, when the defense is done immediately without interval or without tarrying or delay,	certes ye seye sooth, whan the defense is doon anon withouten intervalle or withouten tariyng or delay,
And if you say that justice asks a man to fight off violence by violence and fighting by fighting,	And if ye seye that right axeth a man to defenden violence by violence and fightyng by fightyng,
And therefore says Seneca that `a man shall never avenge wickedness by wickedness."	And therfore seith Senec that `a man shal nevere vengen shrewednesse by shrewednesse.'
in other manner than justice commands, you sin.	in oother manere than right comandeth, ye synnen.
And also, if you will avenge yourself of the outrage of your adversaries	And also, if ye wol venge yow of the outrage of youre adversaries
And therefore you shall avenge yourself after the order of justice; that is to say, by the law	And therfore ye shul venge yow after the ordre of right; that is to seyn, by the lawe
For Cassiodorus says that `as evil does he that avenges himself by outrage as he that does the outrage.'	For Cassidore seith that `as yvele dooth he that vengeth hym by outrage as he that dooth the outrage.'
but in no case of the world should a man do outrage nor excess to avenge himself.	but in no caas of the world a man sholde nat doon outrage ne excesse for to vengen hym.
"A," said dame Prudence, "you say your will and as you please,	"A," quod dame Prudence, "ye seyn youre wyl and as yow liketh,
and though I do a great excess; that is to say, that I avenge one outrage by another."	and though I do a greet excesse; that is to seyn, that I venge oon outrage by another."
though I put myself in a little peril in order to avenge myself,	though I putte me in a litel peril for to venge me,
And therefore it seems to me men ought not reprove me,	And therfore me thynketh men oghten nat repreve me,
yet took they no heed of the peril, but fulfilled their wicked will and their desire.	yet tooken they noon heede of the peril, but fulfilleden hir wikked wyl and hir corage.
to do me a villainy in taking vengeance upon me,	to do me a vileynye in takynge vengeance upon me,
for my heart may never be in peace until the time it is avenged.	for myn herte may nevere been in pees unto the tyme it be venged.
nor am I of the number of very perfect men,	ne I nam nat of the nombre of right parfite men,
but every man may not have the perfection that you seek;	but every man may nat have the perfeccioun that ye seken;
"Certainly," said Melibee, "I grant you, dame Prudence, that patience is a great virtue of perfection;	"Certes," quod Melibee, "I graunte yow, dame Prudence, that pacience is a greet vertu of perfeccioun;
And therefore says Saint James in his Epistle that `patience is a great virtue of perfection.'"	And therfore seith Seint Jame in his Epistle that `pacience is a greet vertu of perfeccioun.'"
by his force or strength takes great cities.'	by his force or strengthe taketh grete citees.'
and he that may have the lordship of his own heart is more to be praised than he that	and he that may have the lordshipe of his owene herte is moore to preyse than he that
He says also, `It is more worthy to be patient than to be very strong;	He seith also, `It is moore worth to be pacient than for to be right strong;
and the patient man moderates and stills them.'	and the pacient man atempreth hem and stilleth.'
And in another place he says that `he that is patient governs himself with great prudence.'	And in another place he seith that `he that is pacient governeth hym by greet prudence.'
For Solomon says that `the doctrine and the wit of a man is known by patience.'	For Salomon seith that `the doctrine and the wit of a man is knowen by pacience.'
who can not have patience or will not receive patience.	that kan nat have pacience or wol nat receyve pacience.
Also think and believe steadfastly that he is not well trained, nor well taught,	Also troweth and bileveth stedefastly that he nys nat wel ynorissed, ne wel ytaught,
`The joy of God,' he says, `is perdurable' -- that is to say, everlasting.	`The joye of God,' he seith, `is perdurable' -- that is to seyn, everelastynge.
according to what the Apostle says in his epistle.	after that the Apostle seith in his epistle.
and the joy that a man seeks to have by patience in tribulations is ever-lasting,	and the joye that a man seketh to have by pacience in tribulaciouns is perdurable,
considering that the tribulations of this world but little while endure and soon are passed and gone,	considerynge that the tribulaciouns of this world but litel while endure and soone passed been and goon,
Furthermore you should force yourself to have patience,	Forthermoore ye sholde enforce yow to have pacience,
that they have suffered, without their deserts or guilt,	that they han ysuffred, withouten hir desert or gilt,
Also the great patience which the saints that are in Paradise have had in tribulations	Also the grete pacience which the seintes that been in Paradys han had in tribulaciouns
When men cursed him, he cursed them not, and when men beat him, he menaced them not.'	Whan men cursed hym, he cursed hem noght, and whan men betten hym, he manaced hem noght.'
for he did never sin, nor never came there a villainous word out of his mouth.	for he dide nevere synne, ne nevere cam ther a vileyns word out of his mouth.
`Jesus Christ,' he says, `has suffered for us and given example to every man to follow and be guided by him,	`Jhesu Crist,' he seith, `hath suffred for us and yeven ensample to every man to folwe and sewe hym,
to adopt the patience of our Lord Jesus Christ, as says Saint Peter in his Epistles.	to take the pacience of oure Lord Jhesu Crist, as seith Seint Peter in his Epistles.
Also you ought to incline and bow your heart	Also ye owen to enclyne and bowe youre herte
insomuch seems his pain the lighter and the easier unto him.'	in so muche semeth his peyne the lighter and the esier unto hym.'
and inasmuch as he thinks his sins more heavy and grievous,	and in as muche as hym thynketh his synnes moore hevy and grevous,
And Saint Gregory says that `when a man considers well the number of his faults and of his sins,	And Seint Gregorie seith that `whan a man considereth wel the nombre of his defautes and of his synnes,
that come to us, when we think and consider that we have deserved to have them.'	that comen to us, whan we thynken and consideren that we han disserved to have hem.'
For the poet says that `we ought patiently to take the tribulations	For the poete seith that `we oghte paciently taken the tribulacions
for which faults God has allowed you to have this tribulation, as I have said to you before.	for whiche defautes God hath suffred yow have this tribulacioun, as I have seyd yow heer-biforn.
First of all, if you will consider the faults that are in your own person,	First and foreward, if ye wole considere the defautes that been in youre owene persone,
in the wrongs that have been done to you.	in the wronges that han been doon to yow.
and make you to incline to suffer, and to have patience	and make yow for to enclyne to suffre, and for to han pacience
I say that there are very many things that should restrain you from vengeance-taking	I seye that ther be ful manye thynges that shul restreyne yow of vengeance-takynge
Yet I assume (for the sake of argument) you have both might and permission to avenge yourself,	Yet sette I caas ye have bothe myght and licence for to venge yow,
do thee annoyance or grievance, endure it,	do thee anoy or grevaunce, suffre hym,
And Cato says, `If a man of higher estate or degree, or more mighty than thou,	And Catoun seith, `If a man of hyer estaat or degree, or moore myghty than thou,
that strives with a greater man than he is himself.'	that stryveth with a gretter man than he is hymself.'
For Seneca says that `he puts himself in great peril	For Senec seith that `he putteth hym in greet peril
take pains and busy thyself rather to still the same grievance than to avenge thyself.	studie and bisye thee rather to stille the same grevaunce than for to venge thee.
than thou art do thee grievance,	than thou art do thee grevaunce,
And if it so befall or happen that a man of greater might and strength	And if it so bifalle or happe that a man of gretter myght and strengthe
For Solomon says, `It is a great honor to a man to keep himself from quarrels and strife.'	For Salomon seith, `It is a greet worshipe to a man to kepen hym fro noyse and stryf.'
And therefore a man should flee striving as much as he might.	And therfore sholde a man flee stryvynge as muchel as he myghte.
with as strong a man as he is -- it is perilous/ ,	with as strong a man as he is -- it is peril,
and to strive with a man of even strength -- that is to say,	and for to stryve with a man of evene strengthe -- that is to seyn,
with a stronger or a more mighty man than he is himself,	with a strenger or a moore myghty man than he is hymself,
"Furthermore, you know well that according to the common saying, `it is a madness for a man to strive	"Forthermoore, ye knowen wel that after the comune sawe, `it is a woodnesse a man to stryve
And therefore say I that it is good for now that you suffer and be patient.	And therfore seye I that it is good as now that ye suffre and be pacient.
I have showed you ere this that their condition is better than yours.	I have shewed yow er this that hire condicion is bettre than youres.
for if you will make comparison unto the might of your adversaries, you shall find in many things that	for if ye wole maken comparisoun unto the myght of youre adversaries, ye shul fynde in manye thynges that
I say you are not of might and power right now to avenge yourself,	I seye ye been nat of myght and power as now to venge yow,
"But let us now suppose that you have leave to avenge yourself.	"But lat us now putte that ye have leve to venge yow.
that they should put out the judges and the rulers from their places,	that they sholden putte out the juges and the sovereyns from hir places,
that they should, because of such tolerance, by the passage of time grow in such power and might	that they sholden, by swich suffrance, by proces of tyme wexen of swich power and myght
And the judges and rulers might in their land so much tolerate the scoundrels and evildoers	And the juges and sovereyns myghten in hir land so muchel suffre of the shrewes and mysdoeres
Also a wise man says that `the judge who corrects not the sinner commands and bids him to do sin.'	Also a wys man seith that `the juge that correcteth nat the synnere comandeth and biddeth hym do synne.'
they summon a man not entirely only to do new wrongs, but they command it.	they sompne nat a man al oonly for to do newe wronges, but they comanden it.
for when they allow over-much the wrongs and the villainies to be done without punishing,	for whan they suffren over-muchel the wronges and the vileynyes to be doon withouten punysshynge,
And therefore those two authorities that you have spoken of above are only understood in the judges,	And therfore tho two auctoritees that ye han seyd above been oonly understonden in the juges,
for that pertains and belongs entirely only to the judges, for they shall avenge the villainies and injuries.	for that aperteneth and longeth al oonly to the juges, for they shul venge the vileynyes and injuries.
But yet it follows not thereof that every person to whom men do villainy should take vengeance for it,	But yet ne folweth it nat therof that every persone to whom men doon vileynye take of it vengeance,
For men say, `In much suffering shall many things happen to thee which thou shalt not be able to endure.'"	For men seyn, `In muchel suffrynge shul manye thynges falle unto thee whiche thou shalt nat mowe suffre.'"
and so should I be put down and considered too humble.	and so sholde I been put and holden overlowe.
I might neither bear nor sustain it,	I myghte neither bere it ne susteene,
And also for my patience men would do to me so much villainy that	And also for my suffrance men wolden do me so muchel vileynye that
thou summonest thine adversaries to do thee a new villainy.'	thou sompnest thyne adversaries to do thee a newe vileynye.'
For it is written, `If thou take no vengeance of an old villainy,	For it is writen, `If thou take no vengeance of an oold vileynye,
and all others, to do me another villainy.	and alle othere, to do me another vileynye.
I summon or announce to them that have done to me that villainy,	I sompne or warne hem that han doon to me that vileynye,
Melibee answered, "If I do not avenge myself for the villainy that men have done to me,	Melibee answerde, "If I ne venge me nat of the vileynye that men han doon to me,
And he shall avenge you according to what he himself witnesses, where he says,	And he shal venge yow after that hymself witnesseth, where as he seith,
unto the Supreme Judge that avenges all villainies and wrongs.	unto the sovereyn Juge that vengeth alle vileynyes and wronges.
then have you no other remedy but to have your recourse	thanne have ye noon oother remedie but for to have youre recours
and the vengeance that is done in hope of Fortune is perilous and uncertain,	and the vengeance that is doon in hope of Fortune is perilous and uncertein,
and before the judge pleases you not,	and bifore the juge ne liketh yow nat,
Now then, since you desire and ask vengeance, and the vengeance that is done according to the law	Now thanne, syn ye desire and axe vengeance, and the vengeance that is doon after the lawe
For Seneca says, `Whatever man that is nourished by Fortune, she makes him a great fool.'	For Senec seith, `What man that is norissed by Fortune, she maketh hym a greet fool.'
I say that to that degree should you have the less trust in her and in her wisdom.	I seye that in so muchel shul ye the lasse truste in hire and in hir wit.
And whereas you say that Fortune has nourished you from your childhood,	And where as ye seyn that Fortune hath norissed yow fro youre childhede,
for when thou believest her to be most sure or certain of her help,	for whan thow trowest to be moost seur or siker of hire help,
Trust not in her, for she is not steadfast nor stable,	Trusteth nat in hire, for she nys nat stidefast ne stable,
the more brittle and the sooner broken she is.'	the moore brotil and the sonner broken she is.'
And, as the same Seneca says, `The more clear and the more shining that Fortune is,	And, as the same Senec seith, `The moore cleer and the moore shynyng that Fortune is,
for `things that are foolishly done, and that are in hope of Fortune, shall never come to a good end.'	for `thynges that been folily doon, and that been in hope of Fortune, shullen nevere come to good ende.'
nor shall you rely on or bow unto her, according to the word of Seneca,	ne ye shul nat lene or bowe unto hire, after the word of Senec,
"Certainly," said Prudence, "if you will work by my advice, you shall not test Fortune in any way,	"Certes," quod Prudence, "if ye wol werke by my conseil, ye shul nat assaye Fortune by no wey,
Now will I test her, believing that, with God's help, she shall help me to avenge my shame."	Now wol I assayen hire, trowynge, with Goddes help, that she shal helpe me my shame for to venge."
and has helped me to pass many a difficult situation.	and hath holpen me to passe many a stroong paas.
"A," said Melibee, "this vengeance pleases me not at all.	"A," quod Melibee, "this vengeance liketh me no thyng.
and he shall punish them as the law asks and requires."	and he shal punysse hem as the lawe axeth and requireth."
that has the jurisdiction upon them,	that hath the jurisdiccion upon hem,
If you will then take vengeance on your enemies, you shall turn to or bring your case to the judge	If ye wol thanne take vengeance of youre enemys, ye shul retourne or have youre recours to the juge
but they bear it to punish the scoundrels and evildoers and to defend the good men.'	but they beren it to punysse the shrewes and mysdoers and for to defende the goode men.'
`the judges do not bear the spear without cause,	`the juges beren nat the spere withouten cause,
And Saint Paul the Apostle says in his Epistle, when he writes unto the Romans, that	And Seint Paul the Apostle seith in his Epistle, whan he writeth unto the Romayns, that
And another says, `The judge that dreads to do justice makes men scoundrels.'	And another seith, `The juge that dredeth to do right maketh men shrewes.'
that it displeases the judges and the rulers.'	that it displeseth to the juges and the sovereyns.'
For Seneca says thus: `That master,' he says, `is good who reproves scoundrels.'	For Senec seith thus: `That maister,' he seith, `is good that proveth shrewes.'
just so sins the judge if he do no vengeance on them that have deserved it.	right so synneth the juge if he do no vengeance of hem that it han disserved.
And yet say I more, that just as a private person sins in taking vengeance on another man,	And yet seye I moore, that right as a singuler persone synneth in takynge vengeance of another man,
when they see the punishing and chastising of the trespassers."	whan they seen the punyssynge and chastisynge of the trespassours."
and they that have will to do wickedness restrain their wicked purpose,	and they that han wyl to do wikkednesse restreyne hir wikked purpos,
for by the vengeance-taking are the wicked men distinguished from the good men,	for by the vengeance-takynge been the wikked men dissevered fro the goode men,
a man would never take vengeance, and that would be a harm;	a man wolde nevere take vengeance, and that were harm;
But if amyone would consider in all vengeances the perils and evils that might follow from vengeance-taking,	But whoso wolde considere in alle vengeances the perils and yveles that myghte sewe of vengeance-takynge,
showing me the perils and the evils that might fall because of this vengeance.	shewynge me the perils and the yveles that myghten falle of this vengeance.
"Certainly," said Melibee, "I see well that you strengthen yourself much by words to overcome me in such a manner	"Certes," quod Melibee, "I se wel that ye enforce yow muchel by wordes to overcome me in swich manere
and have wounded thy daughter in the aforesaid manner."	and han ywounded thy doghter in the forseyde manere."
that thy three enemies are entered into thine house by the windows	that thy three enemys been entred into thyn house by the wyndowes
And in the same manner our Lord Christ has willed and allowed	And in the same manere oure Lord Crist hath woold and suffred
this is to say, the deadly sins that are entered into thine heart by thy five senses.	this is to seyn, the deedly synnes that been entred into thyn herte by thy fyve wittes.
so that they have wounded thy soul in five places;	so that they han wounded thy soule in fyve places;
and hast not defended thyself sufficiently against their assaults and their temptations,	and hast nat defended thyself suffisantly agayns hire assautes and hire temptaciouns,
thou hast allowed them enter into thine heart willfully by the windows of thy body,	thou hast suffred hem entre in to thyn herte wilfully by the wyndowes of thy body,
-- that is to say, the flesh, the fiend, and the world --	-- that is to seyn, the flessh, the feend, and the world --
Thou hast done sin again our Lord Christ,	Thou hast doon synne agayn oure Lord Crist,
and also he has allowed that thou hast been punished in the manner that thou hast trespassed.	and also he hath suffred that thou hast been punysshed in the manere that thow hast ytrespassed.
has turned away from thee his face and his ears of mercy,	hath turned awey fro thee his face and his eeris of misericorde,
And perhaps Christ has thee in disdain, and	And peraventure Crist hath thee in despit, and
for if thou eat of it to excess, thou shalt vomit' and be needy and poor.	for if thou ete of it out of mesure, thou shalt spewe' and be nedy and povre.
And Solomon says, `If thou hast found honey, eat of it what suffices,	And Salomon seith, `If thou hast founden hony, ete of it that suffiseth,
`Under the honey of the goods of the body is hid the venom that slays the soul.'	`Under the hony of the goodes of the body is hyd the venym that sleeth the soule.'
nor thou hast not well paid attention to the words of Ovid, who says,	ne thou ne hast nat wel ytaken kep to the wordes of Ovide, that seith,
Thou hast not done to him such honor and reverence as thee ought,	Thou ne hast nat doon to hym swich honour and reverence as thee oughte,
Thou hast drunk so much honey of sweet temporal riches, and pleasures and honors of this world	Thou hast ydronke so muchel hony of sweete temporeel richesses, and delices and honours of this world
"Thy name is Melibee; this is to say, `a man that drinks honey.'	"Thy name is Melibee; this is to seyn, `a man that drynketh hony.'
that God, who is full of justice and of righteousness, has allowed this to happen by just reasonable cause.	that God, which that is ful of justice and of rightwisnesse, hath suffred this bityde by juste cause resonable.
Nonetheless, by certain assumptions and conjectures, I hold and believe	Nathelees, by certeyne presumpciouns and conjectynges, I holde and bileeve
there can no man comprehend nor study them sufficiently.'	ther may no man comprehende ne serchen hem suffisantly.'
For the apostle says that `the sciences and the judgments of our Lord God almighty are very deep;	For th' apostle seith that `the sciences and the juggementz of oure Lord God almyghty been ful depe;
certainly, I can not well answer, with any certainty.	certes, I kan nat wel answere, as for no soothfastnesse.
"Now, sir, if men would ask me why God allowed men to do you this villainy,	"Now, sire, if men wolde axe me why that God suffred men to do yow this vileynye,
when they are badly begun.'	whanne they been baddely bigonne.'
For we should suppose that they shall come to a wicked end,	For we shull suppose that they shul come to a wikked ende,
happen to them in this case, nor can I judge except by conjecture and by supposing.	bityde of hem in this caas, ne kan I nat deeme but by conjectynge and by supposynge.
But to speak of the far cause, as to what end they shall come, or what shall finally	But for to speken of the fer cause, as to what ende they shul come, or what shal finally
The cause final was to slay thy daughter. It did not delay insofar as was in their power.	The cause final was for to sle thy doghter. It letted nat in as muche as in hem was.
The cause formal is the manner of their working who brought ladders and climbed in at thy windows.	The cause formal is the manere of hir werkynge that broghten laddres and cloumben in at thy wyndowes.
The cause material are the five wounds of thy daughter.	The cause material been the fyve woundes of thy doghter.
The cause accidental was hate.	The cause accidental was hate.
The near cause is thy three enemies.	The neer cause is thy thre enemys.
The far cause is almighty God, that is cause of all things .	The fer cause is almyghty God, that is cause of alle thynges.
which clerks call Oriens and Efficiens, and Causa longinqua and Causa propinqua;	whiche that clerkes clepen Oriens and Efficiens, and Causa longinqua and Causa propinqua;
thou shalt understand that the wrong that thou hast received has certain causes,	thou shalt understonde that the wrong that thou hast receyved hath certeine causes,
"Now, sir, as to the point that Cicero calls `causes,' which is the last point,	"Now, sire, as to the point that Tullius clepeth `causes,' which that is the laste point,
and much sorrow and wasting of riches, as I said.	and muchel sorwe and wastynge of richesses, as I seyde.
and by the vengeance-taking thereupon that would engender another vengeance,	and of the vengeance-takynge upon that wolde engendre another vengeance,
is engendered by the hate of thine enemies,	is engendred of the hate of thyne enemys,
thou shalt consider that this wrong which that is done to thee	thou shalt considere that this wrong which that is doon to thee
And as touching the fourth point, what Cicero calls `engendering,'	And as touchynge the fourthe point, that Tullius clepeth `engendrynge,'
of which we are not aware, at this time.	of whiche we be nat war, as at this tyme.
Thou shalt understand that the vengeance that thou intendest to take is the consequent;	Thou shalt understonde that the vengeance that thou purposest for to take is the consequent;
"Let us now examine the third point, that Cicero calls `consequent.'	"Lat us now examyne the thridde point, which Tullius clepeth `consequent.'
Then must you see that your power is not consistent, nor accords not, with your willfulness.	Thanne mowe ye seen that youre power ne consenteth nat, ne accordeth nat, with youre wilfulnesse.
And certainly in justice must you take no vengeance, as of your own authority.	And certes rightfully ne mowe ye take no vengeance, as of youre propre auctoritee.
but only such thing as we can do justly.	but oonly swich thyng as we may doon rightfully.
For truly, strictly speaking, we can do no thing	For sikerly, as for to speke proprely, we may do no thyng
And certainly thou can well say that `nay.'	And certes thou mayst wel seyn that `nay.'
and suffice to thy willfulness and to thy advisors.	and suffise to thy wilfulnesse and to thy conseillours.
thou should consider if thy might and thy power can consent	thou shalt considere if thy myght and thy power may consenten
when it is granted to him to take that vengeance hastily or temperately, as the law requires.	whan it is graunted hym to take thilke vengeance hastily or attemprely, as the lawe requireth.
but the judge that has the jurisdiction of it,	but the juge that hath the jurisdiccioun of it,
For, by justice and reason, there may no man take vengeance on no person	For, as by right and resoun, ther may no man taken vengeance on no wight
And certainly, you know well `nay.'	And certes, ye knowe wel `nay.'
whether it accord to reason.	wheither it accorde to resoun.
Then let us consider also the advice of those who advised you to take sudden vengeance,	Thanne lat us considere also if the conseillyng of hem that conseilleden yow to taken sodeyn vengeaunce,
And certainly, in that respect, their condition is better than yours.	And certes, as in that, hir condicioun is bet than youres.
and the kin of your enemies are close relatives to them.	and the kyn of youre enemys been ny syb to hem.
yet nevertheless your kinship is but a far kinship; they are but little related to you,	yet nathelees youre kynrede nys but a fer kynrede; they been but litel syb to yow,
to avenge their death and to slay thy person.	to wreken hir deeth and to sle thy persone.
And though it so were that thou haddest slain of them two or three, yet dwell there enough	And though so were that thou haddest slayn of hem two or three, yet dwellen ther ynowe
But thine enemies are three, and they have many children, brethren, cousins, and other close kin.	But thyne enemys been thre, and they han manie children, bretheren, cosyns, and oother ny kynrede.
and when each person has his part, they will take but little regard to avenging thy death.	and whan that every wight hath his part, they ne wollen taken but litel reward to venge thy deeth.
You know also that your riches must be dispended in several parts,	Ye knowen also that youre richesses mooten been dispended in diverse parties,
for which your enemies for dread should stop pleading with you or destroying your person.	wherfore that youre enemys for drede sholde stinte to plede with yow or to destroye youre persone.
nor do you have neither brethren, nor first cousins, nor any other close relatives,	ne ye ne han bretheren, ne cosyns germayns, ne noon oother neigh kynrede,
for certainly you have no child but a daughter,	for certes ye ne han no child but a doghter,
For although it be so that you are mighty and rich, certainly you are but alone,	For al be it so that ye be myghty and riche, certes ye ne been but allone,
for truly, all those who advised you to make sudden war are not your friends.	for trewely, alle tho that conseilleden yow to maken sodeyn werre ne been nat youre freendes.
they that consented to your hasty willfulness,	they that consenteden to youre hastif wilfulnesse,
And certainly, as to the first point, it is well known which folk are	And certes, as to the firste poynt, it is wel knowen whiche folk been
and which are they that consented to your adversaries.	and whiche been they that consenteden to youre adversaries.
And let us consider also who are they, and how many are they,	And lat us considere also who been they, and how manye been they,
in thy willfulness to do hasty vengeance.	in thy wilfulnesse to doon hastif vengeance.
who are they, and which are they and how many that consent to thy advice	who been they, and whiche been they and how manye that consenten to thy conseil
For Cicero hypothesized a thing which he calls `consenting'; this is to say,	For Tullius put a thyng which that he clepeth `consentynge'; this is to seyn,
And after this, then you should examine the second condition which the same Cicero adds in this matter.	And after this, thanne shul ye examyne the seconde condicion which that the same Tullius addeth in this matiere.
and how many trespassers, and in what manner	and how manye trespassours, and in what manere
for it is well known who they are that have done to you this trespass and villainy,	for it is wel wist whiche they been that han doon to yow this trespas and vileynye,
Certainly, the truth of this matter, or of this advice, we need not diligently inquire,	Certes, the trouthe of this matiere, or of this conseil, nedeth nat diligently enquere,
But nevertheless, let us now descend to the particular details. You should first proceed according to the doctrine of Cicero.	But nathelees, lat us now descende to the special. Ye shuln first procede after the doctrine of Tullius.
which advisors are enough reproved by the reasons spoken earlier.	which conseillours been ynogh repreved by the resouns aforeseyd.
to have called such sort of folk to your council,	to han cleped swich manere folk to youre conseil,
And certainly, sir, as I have said before, you have greatly erred	And certes, sire, as I have seyd biforn, ye han greetly erred
the young folk also, who advised you to avenge yourself and make war immediately.	the yonge folk also, that conseilleden yow to venge yow and make werre anon.
that advised you certain things secretly, and openly counseled you the contrary;	that conseilled yow certeyne thynges prively, and openly conseilleden yow the contrarie;
such as do you reverence without love,	swiche as doon yow reverence withouten love,
But now let us speak of the advice that was agreed upon by your neighbors,	But now lat us speken of the conseil that was accorded by youre neighebores,
And Cassiodorus says, `The protection is stronger when it is long time considered.'	And Cassidorus seith, `The garnysoun is stronger whan it is longe tyme avysed.'
For Cicero says that `long preparation before the battle makes short victory.'	For Tullius seith that `longe apparaillyng biforn the bataille maketh short victorie.'
ere thou begin, I advise that thou prepare thyself for that, and do it with great deliberation.	er thow bigynne, I rede that thou apparaille thee therto, and do it with greet deliberacion.
Then say I that in vengeance-taking, in war, in battle, and in fortification,	Thanne seye I that in vengeance-takyng, in werre, in bataille, and in warnestooryng,
For Cicero says, `In every urgent matter, ere thou begin it, prepare thyself with great diligence.'	For Tullius seith, `In every nede, er thou bigynne it, apparaille thee with greet diligence.'
truly, I believe that they spoke very wisely and real truth.	trewely, I trowe that they seyden right wisely and right sooth.
but that you ought to prepare yourself and get ready in this case with great diligence and great deliberation;	but that yow oghte purveyen and apparaillen yow in this caas with greet diligence and greet deliberacioun;
Now, sir, as to the third point, whereas your old	Now, sire, as to the thridde point, where as youre olde
for a lord to be beloved by his citizens and by his people.'	a lord to be biloved of his citezeins and of his peple.'
that no man can vanquish nor discomfit, and that is	that no man may venquysse ne disconfite, and that is
For thus says Cicero, that `there is a sort of garrison	For thus seith Tullius, that `ther is a manere garnysoun
that he is beloved by his subjects and by his neighbors.	that he be biloved with hys subgetz and with his neighebores.
as well to keep his person as his goods, is	as wel to kepen his persone as his goodes, is
And understand well that the greatest and strongest garrison that a rich man may have,	And understoond wel that the gretteste and strongeste garnysoun that a riche man may have,
unless they are defended by true friends that are old and wise.	but if they be defended by trewe freendes that been olde and wise.
and when that they are accomplished, yet are they not worth a straw,	and whan that they been accompliced, yet be they nat worth a stree,
"of high towers and of great edifices pertains sometimes to pride.	"of heighe toures and of grete edifices apperteyneth somtyme to pryde.
To this sentence answered immediately Prudence: "Fortifying," said she,	To this sentence answerde anon Prudence: "Warnestooryng," quod she,
that my enemies shall be in dread to approach my house."	that myne enemys shul been in drede myn hous for to approche."
by which things I can my person and my house so guard and defend	by whiche thynges I may my persone and myn hous so kepen and deffenden
such as have castles and other sorts of edifices, and armor, and artillery,	swiche as han castelles and othere manere edifices, and armure, and artelries,
Melibeus answered and said, "Certainly, I understand it in this way: That I should fortify my house with towers,	Melibeus answerde and seyde, "Certes, I understande it in this wise: That I shal warnestoore myn hous with toures,
I would be eager to know how you understand those words and what is your decision."	I wolde fayn knowe how that ye understonde thilke wordes and what is youre sentence."
whereas your wise advisors counseled you to fortify your house with great diligence,	where as youre wise conseillours conseilled yow to warnestoore youre hous with gret diligence,
"Now, as to the second point,	"Now, as to the seconde point,
Yet thou should dread to be poisoned and keep thyself from the company of scoffers.	Yet shaltou drede to been empoisoned and kepe the from the compaignye of scorneres.
The book says that `some folk have great desire to deceive, but yet they dread themselves to be deceived.'	The book seith that `somme folk han greet lust to deceyve, but yet they dreden hem to be deceyved.'
But nevertheless, I say not thou should be so cowardly that thou fear where there is no reason for dread.	But nathelees, I sey nat thou shalt be so coward that thou doute ther wher as is no drede.
and a hound will bring to bay the wild boar.'	and an hound wol holde the wilde boor.'
And the book says, `A little thorn may prick a king very sorely,	And the book seith, `A litel thorn may prikke a kyng ful soore,
Ovid says that `the little weasel will slay the great bull and the wild hart.'	Ovyde seith that `the litel wesele wol slee the grete bole and the wilde hert.'
Seneca says, `A man that is well advised, he dreads his least enemy.'	Senek seith, `A man that is well avysed, he dredeth his leste enemy.'
not only from thy greatest enemies but from thy least enemy.	nat oonly fro thy gretteste enemys but fro thy leeste enemy.
this is to say, be not negligent to guard thy person	this is to seyn, ne be nat necligent to kepe thy persone
And although it be so that it seems that thou art in a safe place,	And al be it so that it seme that thou art in siker place,
nor does he who shuns perils fall into perils.'	ne he ne falleth into perils that perils eschueth.'
For Seneca says that `the wise man who dreads harms, shuns harms,	For Senec seith that `the wise man that dredeth harmes, eschueth harmes,
Then shall you evermore watch out for ambushes and all espionage,	Thanne shul ye everemoore contrewayte embusshementz and alle espiaille.
too great self-confidence, to him shall evil befall.'	to greet presumpcioun, hym shal yvel bityde.'
for certainly, he who through the hardiness of his heart and through the hardiness of himself has	for certes, he that thurgh the hardynesse of his herte and thurgh the hardynesse of hymself hath
And Solomon says, `Happy is he who of all has dread,	And Salomon seith, `Weleful is he that of alle hath drede,
for every wise man dreads his enemy.	for every wys man dredeth his enemy.
of your adversary so little that you neglect the protection of your person because of your over-confidence,	of youre adversarie so litel that ye lete the kepyng of youre persone for youre presumpcioun,
And after this then shall you keep yourself in such manner	And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow in swich manere
and them and their advice shun.	and hem and hir conseil eschewe.
And after this then shall you keep yourself wisely from all such manner people as I have said before,	And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow wisely from all swich manere peple as I have seyd bifore,
and if he bear a sword, hold thyself on the left side.'	and if he bere a swerd, hoold thee on the lift syde.'
and if he bears a spear, hold thyself on the right side,	and if he bereth a spere, hoold thee on the right syde,
say that [thou] wolt thither as thou will not go;	seye that [thou] wolt thider as thou wolt nat go;
inquire then as subtly as thou can of his way of life, and of his life before, and feign thy way;	enquere thanne as subtilly as thou mayst of his conversacion, and of his lyf bifore, and feyne thy wey;
And if it so be that he fall into thy company by chance, without thine assent,	And if so be that he falle into thy compaignye paraventure, withouten thyn assent,
but if it so be that thou have known him of a longer time.	but if so be that thou have knowe hym of a lenger tyme.
and be always suspicious of their company.	and have alwey in suspect hire compaignye.
And after this then shall you keep yourself from all unfamiliar folk, and from liars,	And after this thanne shul ye kepe yow fro alle straunge folk, and fro lyeres,
for there is no physician so good as thy true friend.'	for ther nys noon so good a phisicien as thy trewe freend.'
`If thou hast need of help, ask it of thy friends,	`If thou hast nede of help, axe it of thy freendes,
and of them shall you ask help to guard your person. For Cato says,	and of hem shul ye axen help youre persone for to kepe. For Catoun seith,
to your true friends that are proven and known,	to youre trewe freendes that been approved and yknowe,
Now, sir, then shall you commit the guarding of your person	Now, sire, thanne shul ye committe the kepyng of youre persone
`If God does not guard the city, in vain watches he who guards it.'	`If God ne kepe the citee, in ydel waketh he that it kepeth.'
To this opinion agrees the prophet David, who says,	To this sentence accordeth the prophete David, that seith,
For certainly, in this world there is no person that can be advised nor guarded sufficiently	For certes, in this world ther is no wight that may be conseilled ne kept sufficeantly
and be his best help at his need.	and been his sovereyn helpyng at his nede.
that Jesus Christ of his mercy will have him in his protection	that Jhesus Crist of his mercy wol han hym in his proteccion
you shall understand that he who has war shall evermore meekly and devoutly pray, before all things,	ye shul understonde that he that hath werre shal everemoore mekely and devoutly preyen, biforn alle thynges,
And, sir, as to the first point, that touches on the keeping of your person,	And, sire, as to the firste point, that toucheth to the kepyng of youre persone,
and said also that in this case you ought to work very advisedly and with great deliberation.	and seyden also that in this caas yow oghten for to werken ful avysely and with greet deliberacioun.
that over all things you shall do your best effort to guard your person and to garrison your house;	that over alle thynges ye shal doon youre diligence to kepen youre persone and to warnestoore youre hous;
who said all by unanimous agreement, as you have heard before,	that seyden alle by oon accord, as ye han herd bifore,
by the men of law and the wise folk,	by the men of lawe and the wise folk,
And in many other places he recommends peace and accord.	And in manye othere places he amonesteth pees and accord.
but do well to him that does thee harm and bless him that says to thee harm.'	but do wel to hym that dooth thee harm and blesse hym that seith to thee harm.'
He says, `Yield not harm for harm, nor wicked speech for wicked speech,	He seith, `Ne yeldeth nat harm for harm, ne wikked speche for wikked speche,
And to this Saint Paul the Apostle agrees in many places.	And heerto accordeth Seint Paul the Apostle in manye places.
and so forth of other things .	and so forth of othere thynges.
but certainly, wickedness must be cured by goodness, discord by accord, war by peace,	but certes, wikkednesse shal be warisshed by goodnesse, discord by accord, werre by pees,
and forbearance, discord and accord, and many other things ;	and suffraunce, discord and accord, and manye othere thynges;
for good and wickedness are two contraries, and peace and war, vengeance	for good and wikkednesse been two contraries, and pees and werre, vengeaunce
But certainly, the words of the physicians should be understood in this way:	But certes, the wordes of the phisiciens sholde been understonden in this wise:
And therefore one vengeance is not cured by another vengeance, nor one wrong by another wrong,	And therfore o vengeaunce is nat warisshed by another vengeaunce, ne o wroong by another wroong,
nor wrong to wrong, but they are similar.	ne wrong to wrong, but they been semblable.
For certainly, wickedness is not contrary to wickedness, nor vengeance to vengeance,	For certes, wikkednesse is nat contrarie to wikkednesse, ne vengeance to vengeaunce,
Certainly," said she, "the words of the physicians should not have been understood in this way.	Certes," quod she, "the wordes of the phisiciens ne sholde nat han been understonden in thys wise.
and to his own pleasure!	and to his owene plesaunce!
"Lo, lo," said dame Prudence, "how easily is every man inclined to his own desire	"Lo, lo," quod dame Prudence, "how lightly is every man enclined to his owene desir
and then have I cured one contrary by another."	and thanne have I cured oon contrarie by another."
just so shall I avenge myself upon them and do them wrong;	right so shal I venge me upon hem and doon hem wrong;
For just as they have avenged themselves on me and done me wrong,	For right as they han venged hem on me and doon me wrong,
"Certainly," said Melibeus, "I understand it in this way:	"Certes," quod Melibeus, "I understonde it in this wise:
I would be eager to know how you understand that text, and what is your interpretation."	I wolde fayn knowe hou ye understonde thilke text, and what is youre sentence."
that in maladies that one contrary is cured by another contrary --	that in maladies that oon contrarie is warisshed by another contrarie --
And as touching the theory that the physicians developed in this case -- this is to say,	And as touchynge the proposicioun which that the phisiciens encreesceden in this caas -- this is to seyn,
but you ought the rather to reward them and show them your generosity.	but ye oghte the rather gerdone hem and shewe hem youre largesse.
that they serve you for naught,	that they serve yow for noght,
For although it be so that they are your friends, therefore shall you not allow	For al be it so that they been youre freendes, therfore shal ye nat suffren
and also for they should do the more diligent effort in the care of your dear daughter.	and eek for they sholde do the moore ententif bisynesse in the curacion of youre doghter deere.
just so I deduce that they are highly and chiefly rewarded for their noble speech,	right so rede I that they been heighly and sovereynly gerdoned for hir noble speche,
unto the care of those that they have in their governance.	unto the cure of hem which that they han in hir governaunce.
and in accordance with their craft to do great diligence	and after hir craft to doon greet diligence
honor and profit, and no person to harm,	honour and profit, and no wight for to anoye,
and in their speech said very wisely that to their office it pertains to do to every person	and in hir speche seyden ful wisely that to the office of hem aperteneth to doon to every wight
I tell you that the surgeons and physicians have spoken to you in counselling you discretely, as they ought,	I sey yow that the surgiens and phisiciens han seyd yow in youre conseil discreetly, as hem oughte,
and at the physicians, who first spoke in this matter.	and at the phisiciens, that first speeken in this matiere.
And forasmuch as the examination is necessary, let us begin at the surgeons	And for as muche as that the examynacion is necessarie, lat us bigynne at the surgiens
the which of them have spoken most reasonably and taught you best advice.	the whiche of hem han spoken most resonably and taught yow best conseil.
"Examine," said she, "your counsel, and let us see	"Examineth," quod she, "youre conseil, and lat us see
but certainly to persevere long in sin is work of the devil.'"	but certes for to persevere longe in synne is werk of the devel.'"
The proverb says that `to do sin is human,	The proverbe seith that `for to do synne is mannyssh,
I am all ready to change my advisors just as thou will devise.	I am al redy to chaunge my conseillours right as thow wolt devyse.
that he is not to blame who changes his advisors in certain cases and for certain just causes,	that he nys nat to blame that chaungeth his conseillours in certein caas and for certeine juste causes,
but whereas thou hast told me before now	but there as thou hast toold me heerbiforn
Melibeus answered again, and said, "I grant well that I have erred;	Melibeus answerde agayn, and seyde, "I graunte wel that I have erred;
you see well that in such councils fools have the mastery."	ye se wel that in swiche conseillynges fooles han the maistrie."
to the number than to the wisdom of persons,	to the nombre than to the sapience of persones,
and therefore the counsels that are at gatherings and multitudes of folk, where men pay more attention	and therfore the conseils that been at congregaciouns and multitudes of folk, there as men take moore reward
and to the greater number, and to that you are yielded.	and to the gretter nombre, and there been ye condescended.
but you have cast all their words in an hodgepodge, and inclined your heart to the larger part	but ye han cast alle hire wordes in an hochepot, and enclyned youre herte to the moore part
and you have not known the will of your true friends old and wise,	ne ye han nat knowe the wil of youre trewe freendes olde and wise,
between your true friends and your feigned advisors --	bitwixen youre trewe freendes and youre feyned conseillours --
You have erred also, for you have made no division between your advisors -- this is to say,	Ye han erred also, for ye han maked no division bitwixe youre conseillours -- this is to seyn,
nor in suitable manner, as the case requires.	ne in due manere, as the caas requireth.
You have erred also, for you have not examined your advice in the foresaid manner,	Ye han erred also, for ye ne han nat examyned youre conseil in the forseyde manere,
and more deliberation to perform your undertaking.	and moore deliberacion to parfourne youre emprise.
whereas in so great and so urgent a situation it had been necessary to have more advisors	whereas in so greet and so heigh a nede it hadde been necessarie mo conseillours
You have erred also, for it seems that to you it suffices	Ye han erred also, for it semeth that yow suffiseth
and therefore have they advised you rather to your inclination than to your advantage.	and therfore han they rather conseilled yow to youre talent than to youre profit.
They have espied by your words to what thing you are inclined;	They han espied by youre wordes to what thyng ye been enclyned;
your desire and your inclination to make war immediately and to do vengeance.	youre talent and youre affeccioun to make werre anon and for to do vengeance.
You have erred also, for you have shown to your advisors	Ye han erred also, for ye han shewed to youre conseillours
neither in yourself, nor in your advisors, as you ought.	neither in youreself, ne in youre conseillours, as yow oghte.
the which three things you have not annihilated or destroyed them,	the whiche thre thinges ye han nat anientissed or destroyed hem,
the which three things are contrary to every council honorable and beneficial;	the whiche thre thinges been contrariouse to every conseil honest and profitable;
And also you have erred, for you have brought with you to your council anger, greed, and haste,	And eek also ye have erred, for ye han broght with yow to youre conseil ire, coveitise, and hastifnesse,
you have called foreign folk, young folk, false flatterers, and enemies reconciled,	ye han ycleped straunge folk, yonge folk, false flatereres, and enemys reconsiled,
your true friends old and wise,	youre trewe frendes olde and wise,
Also you have erred, for whereas you should only have called to your council	Also ye han erred, for theras ye sholden oonly have cleped to youre conseil
very burdensome and very annoying to hear.	ful chargeant and ful anoyous for to heere.
But certainly, you have suddenly called to your council a great multitude of people,	But certes, ye han sodeynly cleped to youre conseil a greet multitude of peple,
to more folk, if it had been necessary.	to mo folk, if it hadde been nede.
For you should first have called a few folk to your council, and after you might have showed it	For ye sholde first have cleped a fewe folk to youre conseil, and after ye myghte han shewed it
"First of all, you have erred in the assembling of your advisors.	"First and forward, ye han erred in th' assemblynge of youre conseillours.
in which advice you have erred in many a different way.	in which conseil ye han erred in many a sondry wise.
Trust me well," said she, "that your advice in this case should not, to speak properly,	Trusteth me wel," quod she, "that youre conseil as in this caas ne sholde nat, as to speke properly,
And truly, I hope that your benignity will take it in patience.	And soothly, I hope that youre benyngnytee wol taken it in pacience.
for your honor, and for your benefit also.	for youre honour, and for youre profite eke.
For God knows that, in my intent, I speak it for your best,	For God woot that, as in myn entente, I speke it for youre beste,
nor upset your heart, though I speak something that may displease you.	ne distempre youre herte, thogh I speke thyng that yow displese.
"My lord," said she, "I beseech you in all humility that you will not willfully reply against my arguments,	"My lord," quod she, "I biseke yow in al humblesse that ye wol nat wilfully replie agayn my resouns,
that we have chosen in our present need."	that we han chosen in oure present nede."
and tell me how you like it, or what it seems to you, concerning our advisors	and telle me how liketh yow, or what semeth yow, by oure conseillours
But now would I eagerly desire that you would get down to particulars	But now wolde I fayn that ye wolde condescende in especial
"Dame," said he, "as yet until this time you have well and fittingly taught me as in general how	"Dame," quod he, "as yet into this tyme ye han wel and covenably taught me as in general how
This Melibeus, when he had heard the doctrine of his wife dame Prudence, answered in this wise:	This Melibeus, whanne he hadde herd the doctrine of his wyf dame Prudence, answerde in this wyse:
be changed for any condition that may befall, I say that that plan is wicked."	be chaunged for no condicioun that may bityde, I seye that thilke conseil is wikked."
"And take this for a general rule, that every plan that is affirmed so strongly that it may not	"And take this for a general reule, that every conseil that is affermed so strongly that it may nat
and also if it so be that it is impossible, or can not goodly be performed or kept.	and eek if so be that it be inpossible, or may nat goodly be parfourned or kept.
For the laws say that `all promises that are dishonest are of no value';	For the lawes seyn that `alle bihestes that been dishoneste been of no value';
Also if thy plan be unjust, or else comes of dishonest cause, change thy plan.	Also if thy conseil be dishonest, or ellis cometh of dishonest cause, chaunge thy conseil.
or by other cause, harm or damage may befall.	or by oother cause, harm or damage may bityde.
Thou mayst also change thy plan if it so be that thou find that by error,	Thou mayst also chaunge thy conseil if so be that thou fynde that by errour,
For the law says that `things that newly befall require new plans.'	For the lawe seith that `upon thynges that newely bityden bihoveth newe conseil.'
or when a new case befalls.	or whan a newe caas bitydeth.
Truly, a man may change his purpose and his plans if the cause ceases,	Soothly, a man may chaungen his purpos and his conseil if the cause cesseth,
you may change your plans without earning dishonor.	ye may chaunge youre counseil withouten youre repreve.
"Now is it reasonable and time that I show you when and wherefore that	"Now is it resoun and tyme that I shewe yow whanne and wherfore that
you can perform your enterprise, prosecute it then diligently until it be at an end.	ye may parfourne youre emprise, conferme it thanne sadly til it be at an ende.
And after, when you have examined your advice, as I have said before, and know well that	And after, whan ye han examyned youre conseil, as I have seyd biforn, and knowen wel that
whether he can perform it or not.	wheither he may parfourne it or noon.
Well say they who forbid every person to attempt a thing of which he is in doubt	Wel seyn they that defenden every wight to assaye a thyng of which he is in doute
Then may you understand by stronger reasons that if thou hast power to perform a work	Thanne may ye understonde by strenger resons that if thou hast power to parfourne a werk
This is to say, that for thee it is better hold thy tongue still than to speak.	This is to seyn, that thee is bettre holde thy tonge stille than for to speke.
it is better "nay" than "yea."'	it is bettre "nay" than "ye."'
And Petrus Alphonsus says, `If thou hast might to do a thing of which thou must repent,	And Piers Alphonce seith, `If thou hast myght to doon a thyng of which thou most repente,
choose rather to suffer than begin.	chese rather to suffre than bigynne.
And if it so be that thou art in doubt about whether thou can perform a thing or not,	And if so be that thou be in doute wheither thou mayst parfourne a thing or noon,
thou art compelled to abandon an undertaking that thou hast begun.'	thee bihoveth to weyve thyng that thou hast bigonne.'
lest that the charge oppress thee so sorely that	lest that the charge oppresse thee so soore that
And Cato says, `Try to do such thing as thou hast power to do,	And Catoun seith, `Assay to do swich thyng as thou hast power to doon,
nor no person should take upon him so heavy a charge that he might not bear it.	ne no wight sholde take upon hym so hevy a charge that he myghte nat bere it.
unless he might perform it as he ought to;	but if he myghte parfourne it as hym oghte;
For certainly reason will not desire that any man should begin a thing	For certes resoun wol nat that any man sholde bigynne a thyng
then shalt thou consider if thou can perform it and make of it a good end.	thanne shaltou considere if thou mayst parfourne it and maken of it a good ende.
and more beneficial, and have tested it by many wise and old folk,	and moore profitable, and han approved it by manye wise folk and olde,
And when you have examined your advice, as I have said, and (decided) which part is the better	And whan ye han examyned youre conseil, as I have seyd, and which partie is the bettre
Thou shalt also consider all these causes, from whence they are sprung.	Thou shalt eek considere alle thise causes, fro whennes they been sprongen.
and what fruit it may conceive and engender.	and what fruyt it may conceyve and engendre.
Then shalt thou consider of what root is engendered the matter of thy advice	Thanne shaltow considere of what roote is engendred the matiere of thy conseil
as hate, peace, war, grace, profit, or damage, and many other things.	as hate, pees, werre, grace, profit, or damage, and manye othere thynges.
Then shalt thou consider what thing shall follow from that advice,	Thanne shaltou considere what thyng shal folwe of that conseillyng,
and the better part of thy advisors accord thereto, or not.	and the bettre part of thy conseillours acorde therto, or noon.
and also if thy might can attain thereto, and if the larger part	and eek if thy myght may atteine therto, and if the moore part
for to act as thy advisors advise, if reason accord thereto,	for to do by thy conseillours, if resoun accorde therto,
And after this thou shalt consider the things that agree with that thou intendest	And after this thou shalt considere the thynges that acorden to that thou purposest
For he that speaks falsely may not well be advised in that case of which he lies.	For he that seith fals may nat wel be conseilled in that cas of which he lieth.
that real truth be said and preserved; this is to say, tell truly thy tale.	that verray trouthe be seyd and conserved; this is to seyn, telle trewely thy tale.
First of all thou shalt consider that in that thing that thou intendest, and upon which thing thou will have advice,	Alderfirst thou shalt considere that in thilke thyng that thou purposest, and upon what thyng thou wolt have conseil,
now will I teach you how you shall examine your advice, according to the doctrine of Cicero.	now wol I teche yow how ye shal examyne youre conseil, after the doctrine of Tullius.
and of which folk you shall follow the advice,	and of which folk ye shul folwe the conseil,
"Now, sir, since I have showed you of which folk you shall take your advice	"Now, sire, sith I have shewed yow of which folk ye shul take youre conseil
Thou shalt also shun the advice of young folk, for their counsel is not ripe.	Thou shalt also eschue the conseillyng of yong folk, for hir conseil is nat rype.
And David says, `Blissful is that man who has not followed the advice of scoundrels.'	And David seith, `Blisful is that man that hath nat folwed the conseilyng of shrewes.'
`The advice of wicked folk is always full of fraud.'	`The conseillyng of wikked folk is alwey ful of fraude.'
Thou shalt also be suspicious of the advice of wicked folk. For the book says,	Thou shalt also have in suspect the conseillyng of wikked folk. For the book seith,
when a person appears to do one thing openly and secretly works the contrary.'	whan he sheweth to doon o thyng openly and werketh prively the contrarie.'
For Cassiodorus says that `it is a difficult task to hinder a scheme,	For Cassidorie seith that `it is a manere sleighte to hyndre,
You shall also be suspicious of the advice of such folk as	Ye shul also han in suspect the conseillyng of swich folk as
For Solomon says, `There is no secrecy where drunkenness reigns.'	For Salomon seith, `Ther is no privetee ther as regneth dronkenesse.'
Thou shalt also shun the advice of folk that are drunkards, for they nor can hide no plans.	Thou shalt also eschue the conseiling of folk that been dronkelewe, for they ne kan no conseil hyde.
unless he has more love of the people than dread.'	but if he have moore love of the peple than drede.'
And Cicero says, `There is no might so great of any emperor that long may endure,	And Tullius seith, `Ther nys no myght so greet of any emperour that longe may endure,
`There is no person perfectly true to him whom he too sorely dreads.'	`Ther is no wight parfitly trewe to hym that he to soore dredeth.'
And therefore says a philosopher in this manner:	And therfore seith a philosophre in this wise:
for perhaps they say it more for dread than for love.	for peraventure they seyn it moore for drede than for love.
And also thou most shun the advice of those who are thy servants and bear thee great reverence,	And eek thou most eschue the conseillyng of hem that been thy servantz and beren thee greet reverence,
And Petrus Alphnsus says, `Make no fellowship with thine old enemies, for if thou do them goodness,	And Peter Alfonce seith, `Make no felawshipe with thyne olde enemys, for if thou do hem bountee,
the which victory he might not have by strife or war.	the which victorie he myghte nat have by strif or werre.
because he supposes to have victory over thy person by such feigned behavior,	by cause that he deemeth to have victorie over thy persone by swich feyned contenance,
For certainly he makes that feigned humility more for his advantage than for any love of thy person,	For certes he maketh thilke feyned humilitee moore for his profit than for any love of thy persone,
and bows to thee with his head, trust him never.	and lowteth to thee with his heed, ne trust hym nevere.
For surely, though thine enemy be reconciled, and makes thee the appearance of humility,	For sikerly, though thyn enemy be reconsiled, and maketh thee chiere of humylitee,
And therefore says Solomon, `In thine old foe trust never.'	And therfore seith Salomon, `In thyn olde foo trust nevere.'
fire has long time endured, but that there dwells some vapor of warmness.'	fyr hath longe tyme endured, that ther ne dwelleth som vapour of warmnesse.'
And Seneca tells the reason why: `It may not be,' says he, `that where great	And Seneca telleth the cause why: `It may nat be,' seith he, `that where greet
And Aesop says, `Trust not to those with whom thou hast had at some time war or enmity,	And Isope seith, `Ne trust nat to hem to whiche thou hast had som tyme werre or enemytee,
The book says that `no person returns safely into the good will of his old enemy.'	The book seith that `no wight retourneth saufly into the grace of his olde enemy.'
And also thou shalt shun the advice of thine old enemies that are reconciled.	And eek thou shalt eschue the conseillyng of thyne olde enemys that been reconsiled.
And Cato says, `Ponder thee well, and shun the words of sweetness and of pleasance.'	And Caton seith, `Avyse thee wel, and eschue the wordes of swetnesse and of plesaunce.'
And therefore says Cicero, `Incline not thine ears to flatterers, and take no advice of the words of flattery.'	And therfore seith Tullius, `Enclyne nat thyne eres to flatereres, ne taak no conseil of the wordes of flaterye.'
sets a net before his feet to catch him.'	setteth a net biforn his feet to cacche hym.'
He says also that `he who speaks to his friend words of sweetness and of pleasance	He seith also that `he that speketh to his freend wordes of swetnesse and of plesaunce
Solomon says that `the words of a flatterer is a snare with which to catch innocents.'	Salomon seith that `the wordes of a flaterere is a snare to cacche with innocentz.'
than from the sharp words of thy friend who tells thee thy truths.'	than fro the egre wordes of thy freend that seith thee thy sothes.'
And therefore is it more needful that thou shun and dread flatterers than any other people.	And therfore is it moore nede that thou eschue and drede flatereres than any oother peple.
Wherefore Cicero says, `Amongst all the pestilences that are in friendship the greatest is flattery.'	Wherfore Tullius seith, `Amonges alle the pestilences that been in freendshipe the gretteste is flaterie.'
by flattery than to tell you the truth of things.	by flaterye than for to telle yow the soothfastnesse of thynges.
Thou shalt also shun the advice of all flatterers, such as exert themselves rather to praise your person	Thou shalt eek eschue the conseillyng of alle flatereres, swiche as enforcen hem rather to preise youre persone
and easily believes all goodness in himself.'	and lightly troweth alle bountee in hymself.'
The book says that `the characteristic of a fool is this: he easily believes harm of every person,	The book seith that `the propretee of a fool is this: he troweth lightly harm of every wight,
for he can not advise except in accordance with his own desire and his inclination.'	for he ne kan noght conseille but after his owene lust and his affeccioun.'
First, you shall shun the advice of fools; for Solomon says, `Take no counsel of a fool,	First, ye shul eschue the conseillyng of fooles; for Salomon seith, `Taak no conseil of a fool,
I will teach you which advice you ought to shun.	wol I teche yow which conseil ye oghte to eschewe.
For Solomon says, `Salvation of things is where there are many advisors.'	For Salomon seith, `Salvacion of thynges is where as ther been manye conseillours.'
for sometimes it is necessary to be advised by many.	for somtyme bihooveth it to been conseilled by manye.
And work not always in every need by one advisor alone;	And werke nat alwey in every nede by oon counseillour allone;
that is to say, that they are true, wise, and of old experience.	that is to seyn, that they be trewe, wise, and of oold experience.
But look always that thy advisors have those three conditions that I have said before --	But looke alwey that thy conseillours have thilke thre condiciouns that I have seyd bifore --
thou mayst afterward tell it to more folk if it be needed.	thou mayst afterward telle it to mo folk if it be nede.
For although it be so that thou first tell thy advice only to a few,	For al be it so that thou first ne telle thy conseil but to a fewe,
for Solomon says, `Many friends have thou, but among a thousand chose thyself one to be thy advisor.'	for Salomon seith, `Manye freendes have thou, but among a thousand chese thee oon to be thy conseillour.'
a few of your friends who are particularly esteemed;	a fewe of youre freendes that been especiale;
but certainly they gain strength and increase day by day.'	but certes they enforcen and encreescen day by day.'
by good advice, by a person's power to persuade, and by knowledge; the which three things are not enfeebled by age,	by good conseil, by auctoritee of persones, and by science; the whiche thre thynges ne been nat fieble by age,
And Cicero says that `great things are not always accomplished by strength, nor by agility of body, but	And Tullius seith that `grete thynges ne been nat ay accompliced by strengthe, ne by delivernesse of body, but
For the book says that `in old men is the wisdom, and in long time the prudence.	For the book seith that `in olde men is the sapience, and in longe tyme the prudence.'
such as have seen and are expert in many things and are proven in giving advice.	swiche as han seyn and been expert in manye thynges and been approved in conseillynges.
And by this same reason shall you call to your council some of your friends that are of suitably advanced age,	And by this same resoun shul ye clepen to youre conseil of youre freendes that been of age,
For the book says, `Ask always thy advice of those who are wise.'	For the book seith, `Axe alwey thy conseil of hem that been wise.'
Then shall you also consider whether your true friends are discrete and wise.	Thanne shul ye eek considere if that youre trewe freendes been discrete and wise.
certainly he finds a great treasure.'	certes he fyndeth a greet tresour.'
for certainly gold nor silver are not worth so much as the good will of a true friend.'	for certes gold ne silver ben nat so muche worth as the goode wyl of a trewe freend.'
He says also, `Nothing can be compared to a true friend,	He seith also, `Ther may no thyng be likned to the trewe freend,
just so the advice of true friends gives sweetness to the soul.'	right so the conseil of trewe freendes yeveth swetnesse to the soule.'
For Solomon says that `just as the heart of a man delights in taste that is sweet,	For Salomon seith that `right as the herte of a man deliteth in savour that is soote,
I say that first you shall call to your council your friends that are true.	I seye that first ye shul clepe to youre conseil youre freendes that been trewe.
and of them shalt thou ask thy advice, as the case requires.	and of hem shalt thou aske thy conseil, as the caas requireth.
most faithful and most wise and eldest and most proven in giving advice;	moost feithful and moost wise and eldest and most approved in conseillyng;
And as concerning thy friends, thou shalt consider which of them are	And as touchynge thy freendes, thou shalt considere which of hem been
And after that thou shalt consider thy friends and thine enemies.	And after that thou shalt considere thy freendes and thyne enemys.
than words that are true or beneficial.	than wordes that been trewe or profitable.
for they force themselves always rather to speak pleasant words, inclining to the lord's desire,	for they enforcen hem alwey rather to speken plesante wordes, enclynynge to the lordes lust,
namely the advisors of great lords,	namely the conseillours of grete lordes,
For trust well that commonly these advisors are flatterers,	For trust wel that comunli thise conseillours been flatereres,
nor show him not thy will and thine intent.	ne shewe hym nat thy wille and thyn entente.
First thou shalt make no outward sign whether thou would prefer peace or war, or this or that,	First thou shalt make no semblant wheither thee were levere pees or werre, or this or that,
thy condition stand in the better condition, then shalt thou tell him thy plans in this manner.	thy condicion to stonden in the bettre plyt, thanne shaltou tellen hym thy conseil in this wise.
But nevertheless, if thou believe truly that the revealing of thy plans to a person will make	But nathelees, if thou wene sikerly that the biwreiyng of thy conseil to a persone wol make
how dare thou pray any other person to keep thy advice secretly?'	how darstou prayen any oother wight thy conseil secrely to kepe?'
to whom you have revealed your plans that he will keep it close and still.	to whom ye han biwreyed youre conseil that he wole kepen it cloos and stille.
And therefore for you it is better to hide your plans in your heart than pray him	And therfore yow is bettre to hyde youre conseil in youre herte than praye him
and when thou reveal thy plans to any person, he holds thee in his snare.'	and whan thou biwreyest thy conseil to any wight, he holdeth thee in his snare.'
The book says, `While thou keepest thy plan in thine heart, thou keepest it in thy prison,	The book seith, `Whil that thou kepest thy conseil in thyn herte, thou kepest it in thy prisoun,
Another clerk says that `scarcely shalt thou find any person that can keep plans secretly.'	Another clerk seith that `scarsly shaltou fynden any persone that may kepe conseil secrely.'
for they will give you audience and attention and support in thy presence and scorn thee in thine absence.'	for they wol yeve yow audience and lookynge and supportacioun in thy presence and scorne thee in thyn absence.'
For Jesus son of Sirach says, `Neither to thy foe nor to thy friend discover not thy secret nor thy folly,	For Jhesus Syrak seith, `Neither to thy foo ne to thy frend discovere nat thy secree ne thy folie,
through your revealing your condition shall be to you the more advantageous.	thurgh youre biwreyyng youre condicioun shal be to yow the moore profitable.
Reveal your plans to no person, but if it so be that you believe truly	Biwrey nat youre conseil to no persone, but if so be that ye wenen sikerly that
"When you have pondered the matter and have judged by good deliberation such thing as seems best to you,	"Whan ye han taken conseil in youreself and han deemed by good deliberacion swich thyng as you semeth best,
another time it seems to you the contrary.	another tyme it semeth to yow the contrarie.
for certainly, something that sometimes seems to you that it is good to do,	for certes, somthyng that somtyme semeth to yow that it is good for to do,
Sir, you are not always in the same frame of mind;	Sire, ye ne be nat alwey in lyk disposicioun;
For, as you heard before this, the common proverb is this, that `he who soon judges, soon repents.'	For, as ye herde her biforn, the commune proverbe is this, that `he that soone deemeth, soone repenteth.'
but you must reflect upon it very often.	but ye moste avyse yow on it ful ofte.
you can not judge for the best by a sudden thought that falls in your heart,	ye ne may nat deeme for the beste by a sodeyn thought that falleth in youre herte,
And, sir, you must also drive out of your heart haste; for certainly,	And, sire, ye moste also dryve out of youre herte hastifnesse; for certes,
for always the more abundance that he has of riches, the more he desires.	for evere the moore habundaunce that he hath of richesse, the moore he desireth.
except only to fulfill the object of his greed;	but oonly to fulfille the ende of his coveitise;
And trust well that a greedy man can neither judge nor think anything,	And trust wel that a coveitous man ne kan noght deme ne thynke,
For the Apostle says that greed is root of all harms.	For the Apostle seith that coveitise is roote of alle harmes.
And also, sir, you must drive greed out of your heart.	And eek, sire, ye moste dryve coveitise out of youre herte.
and with his vicious words he stirs other folk to anger and to ire.	and with his viciouse wordes he stireth oother folk to angre and to ire.
can not speak anything but blameworthy things,	ne may nat speke but blameful thynges,
The third is this, that he that is angry and wrathful, as says Seneca,	The thridde is this, that he that is irous and wrooth, as seith Senec,
and he who can not well judge, can not well advise.	and he that may nat wel deme, may nat wel conseille.
And secondly, he who is angry and wrathful, he can not well judge;	And secoundely, he that is irous and wrooth, he ne may nat wel deme;
The first is this: he who has great anger and wrath in himself, he supposes always that	The firste is this: he that hath greet ire and wratthe in hymself, he weneth alwey that
"First, he who asks advice of himself, certainly he must be without anger, for many reasons.	"First, he that axeth conseil of hymself, certes he moste been withouten ire, for manye causes.
that is to say, anger, greed, and haste.	that is to seyn, ire, coveitise, and hastifnesse.
And then shall you drive from your heart three things that are contrary to good advice;	And thanne shul ye dryve fro youre herte thre thynges that been contrariouse to good conseil;
and examine well your thoughts of such thing as it seems to you best for your advantage.	and examyne wel youre thoghtes of swich thyng as yow thynketh that is best for youre profit.
And afterward then shall you take advice in yourself,	And afterward thanne shul ye taken conseil in youreself,
Saint James also says: `If any of you have need of wisdom, ask it of God.'	Seint Jame eek seith: `If any of yow have nede of sapience, axe it of God.'
and look that all thy counsels are in him for evermore.'	and looke that alle thy conseils been in hym for everemoore.'
`At all times thou shalt bless God, and pray him to prepare thy ways,	`At alle tymes thou shalt blesse God, and praye hym to dresse thy weyes,
You shall first in all your works meekly beseech the high God that he will be your advisor;	Ye shul first in alle youre werkes mekely biseken to the heighe God that he wol be youre conseillour;
I will inform you how you shall govern yourself in the choice of your advisors.	I wol enforme yow how ye shul governe yourself in chesynge of youre conseillours.
"Now, sir," said dame Prudence, "and since you consent to be governed by my advice,	"Now, sire," quod dame Prudence, "and syn ye vouche sauf to been governed by my conseil,
and thy great truth, I will govern myself by thy advice in all things."	and thy grete trouthe, I wol governe me by thy conseil in alle thyng."
And, wife, because of thy sweet words, and also because I have tested and proven thy great wisdom	And, wyf, by cause of thy sweete wordes, and eek for I have assayed and preved thy grete sapience
for they give sweetness to the soul and healthfulness to the body.'	for they yeven swetnesse to the soule and hoolsomnesse to the body.'
He says that `words that are spoken discretely and properly are honeycombs,	He seith that `wordes that been spoken discreetly by ordinaunce been honycombes,
"I see well that the word of Solomon is sooth.	"I se wel that the word of Salomon is sooth.
When Melibee had heard the words of his wife Prudence, he said thus:	Whan Melibee hadde herd the wordes of his wyf Prudence, he seyde thus:
And therefore, sir, if you will trust to my advice, I shall restore you your daughter whole and sound.	And therfore, sire, if ye wol triste to my conseil, I shal restoore yow youre doghter hool and sound.
many women are good, and their advice good and beneficial.	manye wommen been goode, and hir conseils goode and profitable.
And, sir, by many other reasons may you see that	And, sire, by manye of othre resons may ye seen that
And what is better than wisdom? Woman. And what is better than a good woman? Nothing.'	And what is better than wisedoom? Womman. And what is bettre than a good womman? Nothyng.'
What is better than jasper? Wisdom.	What is bettre than jaspre? Wisedoom.
And there said once a clerk in two verses, `What is better than gold? Jasper.	And ther seyde oones a clerk in two vers, `What is bettre than gold? Jaspre.
nor called them help of man, but rather confusion of man.	ne called hem help of man, but rather confusioun of man.
our Lord God of heaven would never have made them,	oure Lord God of hevene wolde nevere han wroght hem,
Here may you see that if women were not good, and their advice good and beneficial,	Heere may ye se that if that wommen were nat goode, and hir conseils goode and profitable,
And moreover, when our Lord had created Adam, our forefather, he said in this manner:	And mooreover, whan oure Lord hadde creat Adam, oure forme fader, he seyde in this wise:
And the same goodness in good advising of many a good woman may men tell.	And the same bountee in good conseillyng of many a good womman may men telle.
Hester by her good counsel advanced greatly the people of God in the reign of Assuerus the king.	Hester by hir good conseil enhaunced greetly the peple of God in the regne of Assuerus the kyng.
and appeased the anger of the king by her wit and by her good advice.	and apaysed the ire of the kyng by hir wit and by hir good conseillyng.
Abigail delivered Nabal her husband from David the king, who would have slain him,	Abygail delivered Nabal hir housbonde fro David the kyng, that wolde have slayn hym,
out of the hands of Holofernus, who had besieged it and would have entirely destroyed it.	out of the handes of Olofernus, that hadde it biseged and wolde have al destroyed it.
Judith by her good advice delivered the city of Bethulia, in which she dwelled,	Judith by hire good conseil delivered the citee of Bethulie, in which she dwelled,
and the lordship over all his brethren.	and the lordshipe over alle his bretheren.
Lo, Jacob by the good advice of his mother Rebecca won the blessing of Isaac his fader	Loo, Jacob by good conseil of his mooder Rebekka wan the benysoun of Ysaak his fader
But although it be so that very many a woman is bad and her advice vile and not worthy,	But al be it so that ful many a womman is badde and hir conseil vile and noght worth,
is either too expensive or else too little of price.	is outher to deere or elles to litel of pris.
Also some men have said that the counsel of women	Eek som men han seyd that the conseillynge of wommen
many a woman has been very good, and yet are, and their advices very wholesome and beneficial.	many a womman hath ben ful good, and yet been, and hir conseils ful hoolsome and profitable.
And whereas you blame all women and their reasons, I shall show you by many examples that	And ther as ye blamen alle wommen and hir resouns, I shal shewe yow by manye ensamples that
Thus should you understand the philosopher that says, `In wicked advice women vanquish their husbands.'	Thus sholde ye understonde the philosophre that seith, `In wikked conseil wommen venquisshen hir housbondes.'
certainly your wife ought rather to be praised than blamed.	certes youre wyf oghte rather to be preised than yblamed.
and overcomes you by reason and by good advice,	and overcometh yow by reson and by good conseil,
and if you will do wickedness, and your wife restrains that wicked purpose,	and if ye wole werken wikkednesse, and youre wif restreyneth thilke wikked purpos,
God knows, that reason has no value here.	God woot, thilke resoun stant heere in no stede.
And truly, as to your fifth reason, where you say that in wicked advice women vanquish men,	And soothly, as to youre fifthe resoun, where as ye seyn that in wikked conseil wommen venquisshe men,
I can hide and conceal things that men ought secretly to hide.	I kan hyde and hele thynges that men oghte secreely to hyde.
for you have very often tested my great silence and my great patience, and also how well that	for ye han ful ofte assayed my grete silence and my grete pacience, and eek how wel that
And sir, by your leave, that am not I,	And sire, by youre leve, that am nat I,
`it were better dwell in desert than with a woman that is dissolute.'	`it were bettre dwelle in desert than with a womman that is riotous.'
and of such women says Solomon that	and of swiche wommen seith Salomon that
that is to say, smoke, dropping of rain, and wicked wives;	that is to seyn, smoke, droppyng of reyn, and wikked wyves;
of which women men say that three things drive a man out of his house --	of whiche wommen men seyn that thre thynges dryven a man out of his hous --
know not, as who says that a woman can not hide what she knows;	wot noght, as who seith that a womman kan nat hyde that she woot;
And as to your fourth reason, where you say that the gossip of women can hide things that they	And as to youre fourthe resoun, ther ye seyn that the janglerie of wommen kan hyde thynges that they
whether he will follow by that advice or non.	wheither he wole werke by that conseil or noon.
For truly that man who asks advice about a plan, yet has free choice	For soothly thilke man that asketh conseil of a purpos, yet hath he free choys
but only of them that had lordship and mastery of his person, men would not be advised so often.	but oonly of hem that hadden lordshipe and maistrie of his persone, men wolden nat be conseilled so ofte.
Sir, with all due respect to you, it is not so. For if it were true that no man should be advised	Sire, save youre grace, it is nat so. For if it so were that no man sholde be conseilled
it should seem that you had given me the mastery and the lordship over your person.	it sholde seme that ye hadde yeve me the maistrie and the lordshipe over youre persone.
Your third reason is this: you say that if you govern yourself by my advice,	Youre thridde reson is this: ye seyn that if ye governe yow by my conseil,
something of the perfection of God, who is his maker.	somwhat of the perfeccioun of God, that is his makere.
as he himself records in his Gospels.	as he hymself recordeth in hys Evaungelie.
this is to say, that there is no creature who has supreme goodness save God alone,	this is to seyn, that ther is no wight that hath sovereyn bountee save God allone,
that, in supreme goodness, he found no woman --	that, as in sovereyn bounte, he foond no womman --
Or else, possibly, the intent of Solomon was this:	Or elles, per aventure, the entente of Salomon was this:
many another man has found many a woman very good and true.	many another man hath founden many a womman ful good and trewe.
For though he found no good woman, certainly,	For though that he ne foond no good womman, certes,
it follows not therefore that all women are wicked.	it folweth nat therfore that alle wommen ben wikke.
And though Solomon says that he never found a good woman,	And though that Salomon seith that he ne foond nevere womman good,
appeared to a woman rather than to his Apostles.	appeered rather to a womman than to his Apostles.
And after that, for the great goodness that is in women,	And after that, for the grete bountee that is in wommen,
if all women had been wicked.	if alle wommen hadden been wikke.
For certainly, sir, our Lord Jesus Christ would never have condescended to be born of a woman,	For certes, sire, oure Lord Jhesu Crist wolde nevere have descended to be born of a womman,
And, sir, that there has been many a good woman may easily be proven.	And, sire, that ther hath been many a good womman may lightly be preved.
and ask for advice from lesser folk than himself.'	and enquere of lasse folk than hymself.'
and such things of which he knows nothing, he should not be ashamed to learn them,	and swiche thynges as he noght ne kan, he shal nat been ashamed to lerne hem,
but he shall gladly teach the knowledge that he knows without presumption or pride;	but he shal gladly techen the science that he kan withouten presumpcion or pride;
And Seneca says that `whosoever will have wisdom shall no man disparage,	And Senec seith that `whoso wole have sapience shal no man dispreyse,
`he who despises all, displeases all,' as says the book.	`he that al despiseth, al displeseth,' as seith the book.
And as to the second reason, where you say that all women are wicked;	And as to the seconde resoun, where as ye seyn that alle wommen been wikke;
Truly such a multitude is not honorable.	Soothly swich multitude is nat honest.
full of reason than by a great multitude of folk where every man cries and babbles what he pleases.	ful of resoun than by greet multitude of folk ther every man crieth and clatereth what that hym liketh.
For the truth of things and the benefit are rather found in few folk that are wise and	For the trouthe of thynges and the profit been rather founden in fewe folk that been wise and
yet you need not carry out that plan unless you want to.	yet thar ye nat accomplice thilke ordinaunce but yow like.
And although it be so that your undertaking is established and decided upon by a great multitude of folk,	And al be it so that youre emprise be establissed and ordeyned by greet multitude of folk,
For the book says that `the wise man tells no lie when he turns his inclination to the better.'	For the book seith that `the wise man maketh no lesyng whan he turneth his corage to the bettre.'
performing that same undertaking for a good reason, men should not say therefore that you are a liar nor forsworn.	to perfourne thilke same emprise by juste cause, men sholde nat seyn therfore that ye were a liere ne forsworn.
your undertaking, and nevertheless you abandon	 youre emprise, and nathelees ye weyve
or else when the matter seems other than it was before.	or elles whan the thyng semeth ootherweyes than it was biforn.
it is no folly to change one's plans when the situation is changed,	it is no folie to chaunge conseil whan the thyng is chaunged,
"My lord," said she, "as to your first reason, certainly it may easily be answered. For I say that	"My lord," quod she, "as to youre firste resoun, certes it may lightly been answered. For I seye that
was pleased to say, then she asked of him permission to speak, and said in this manner:	 liked for to seye, thanne axed she of hym licence for to speke, and seyde in this wise:
When dame Prudence, very debonairly and with great patience, had heard all that her husband	Whanne dame Prudence, ful debonairly and with greet pacience, hadde herd al that hir housbonde
until it were time that it must be known, and this may not be.	til it were tyme that it moste be knowe, and this ne may noght be.
And also if I would work according to thy advice, certainly, my counsel must some times be secret,	And also if I wolde werke by thy conseillyng, certes, my conseil moste som tyme be secree,
in the hands of thy children.'	in the handes of thy children.'
ask of thy person things that they need than that thou see thyself	aske of thy persone thynges that hem nedeth than thou see thyself
And Solomon says: `Never in thy life to thy wife, nor to thy child, nor to thy friend	And Salomon seith: `Nevere in thy lyf to thy wyf, ne to thy child, ne to thy freend
For Jesus son of Sirach says that `if the wife have mastery, she is contrary to her husband.'	For Jhesus Syrak seith that `if the wyf have maistrie, she is contrarious to hir housbonde.'
and God forbid that it were so!	and God forbede that it so weere!
it should seem that I had given to thee the mastery over me,	it sholde seme that I hadde yeve to thee over me the maistrie,
And also, certainly, if I governed myself according to thy advice,	And also, certes, if I governed me by thy conseil,
of all women, a good woman found I never.'	of alle wommen, good womman foond I nevere.'
For `of a thousand men,' says Solomon, `I found one good man, but certainly,	For `of a thousand men,' seith Salomon, `I foond o good man, but certes,
Secondly, I say that all women are wicked, and not one good of them all.	Secoundely, I seye that alle wommen been wikke, and noon good of hem alle.
things that are ordained and affirmed by so many wise men.	thynges that been ordeyned and affermed by so manye wyse.
for many causes and reasons. For certainly, every person would hold me then a fool;	for many causes and resouns. For certes, every wight wolde holde me thanne a fool;
This Melibee answered unto his wife Prudence: "I do not intend," said he, "to work according to thy advice,	This Melibee answerde unto his wyf Prudence: "I purpose nat," quod he, "to werke by thy conseil,
The proverb says, `He hastens well that wisely can abide,' and `in wicked haste is no benefit.'"	The proverbe seith, `He hasteth wel that wisely kan abyde,' and `in wikked haste is no profit.'"
for in this manner thy friend will abide and thine enemy shall the longer live in dread.'	for in this wise thy freend wole abyde and thyn enemy shal the lenger lyve in drede.'
For Petrus Alphonsus says, `Whoever does to thee either good or harm, hasten thee not to requite it,	For Piers Alfonce seith, `Whoso that dooth to thee oother good or harm, haste thee nat to quiten it,
do not hasten yourself too fast and, as you hope to prosper, give me a hearing.	ne haste yow nat to faste and, for alle gerdons, as yeveth me audience.
"My lord," said she, "I beseech you, as heartily as I dare and can,	"My lord," quod she, "I yow biseche, as hertely as I dar and kan,
foes and to begin war, she in very humble manner, when she saw her time, said to him these words:	foes and to bigynne werre, she in ful humble wise, whan she saugh hir tyme, seide to hym thise wordes:
Then dame Prudence, when she saw how her husband prepared himself to avenge himself on his	Thanne dame Prudence, whan that she saugh how that hir housbonde shoop hym for to wreken hym on his
When Melibeus had heard that the greatest part of his advisors were agreed that he should make war,	Whan Melibeus hadde herd that the gretteste partie of his conseil weren accorded that he sholde maken werre,
and advised him the contrary in the hearing of all.	and conseilled hym the contrarie in general audience.
Yet had this Melibeus among his advisors many folk that secretly in his ear advised him on certain matters,	Yet hadde this Melibeus in his conseil many folk that prively in his eere conseilled hym certeyn thyng,
`good advice is lacking when it is most needed.'"	`good conseil wanteth whan it is moost nede.'"
"I see well," said this wise man, "that the common proverb is true, that	"I see wel," quod this wise man, "that the commune proverbe is sooth, that
For Solomon says: "Where thou can not have any audience, force thyself not to speak."	For Salomon seith: "Ther as thou ne mayst have noon audience, enforce thee nat to speke."
And when this wise man saw that he lacked an audience, all shame-fast he set himself down again.	And whan this wise man saugh that hym wanted audience, al shamefast he sette hym doun agayn.
as it is to sing before him who weeps.	as it is to synge biforn hym that wepeth.
it as much avails to speak before folk whom his speech annoys	as muche availleth to speken bifore folk to which his speche anoyeth
For truly, he who preaches to those who do not want to hear his words, his sermon annoys them.	For soothly, he that precheth to hem that listen nat heeren his wordes, his sermon hem anoieth.
to rise to interrupt his speech, and very often prayed him to abridge his argument.	to rise for to breken his tale, and beden hym ful ofte his wordes for to abregge.
And when this old man intended to reinforce his argument by reasons, well nigh all at once they began	And whan this olde man wende to enforcen his tale by resons, wel ny alle atones bigonne they
And therefore, ere any war begin, men must have much advice and much deliberation."	And therfore, er that any werre bigynne, men moste have greet conseil and greet deliberacion."
that shall die young because of that same war, or else live in sorrow and die in wretchedness.	that shal sterve yong by cause of thilke werre, or elles lyve in sorwe and dye in wrecchednesse.
For truly, when war is once begun, there is very many a child unborn of his mother	For soothly, whan that werre is ones bigonne, ther is ful many a child unborn of his mooder
but certainly what end that shall consequently befall, it is not easy to know.	but certes what ende that shal therof bifalle, it is nat light to knowe.
when he pleases and easily find war;	whan hym liketh and lightly fynde werre;
War at its beginning has so big an entryway and so large that every person may enter	Werre at his bigynnyng hath so greet an entryng and so large that every wight may entre
"Gentlemen," said he, "there is very many a man that cries `War, war!'	"Lordynges," quod he, "ther is ful many a man that crieth `Werre, werre!'
men should hold themselves still and give him audience.	men sholde holden hem stille and yeven hym audience.
Up rose then one of these old wise men, and with his hand made signal that	Up roos tho oon of thise olde wise, and with his hand made contenaunce that
and with loud voice they cried "War! War!"	and with loud voys they criden "Werre! Werre!"
just so men should avenge their wrongs while they are fresh and new;	right so men sholde wreken hir wronges whil that they been fresshe and newe;
just so as while that iron is hot men should smite,	right so as whil that iren is hoot men sholden smyte,
man, and began to make noise, and said that	man, and bigonnen to make noyse, and seyden that
Up jumped then the young folk at once, and the most part of that company have scorned this old wise man	Up stirten thanne the yonge folk atones, and the mooste partie of that compaignye han scorned this olde wise
something that shall be beneficial."	thyng that shal be profitable."
but he would have deliberation, and in the ground he wrote twice.	but he wolde have deliberacion, and in the ground he wroot twies.
he knew well hmself what he would answer, yet he would not answer suddenly,	he wiste wel hymself what that he wolde answere, yet ne wolde he nat answere sodeynly,
was brought in his presence to know what should be done with her person, although it be so that	was broght in his presence to knowen what sholde be doon with hire persone, al be it so that
And that showed our Lord Jesus Christ by example, for when the woman that was taken in adultery	And that shewed oure Lord Jhesu Crist by ensample, for whan that the womman that was taken in avowtrie
when it is sufficient and reasonable.	whan it is sufficeant and resonable.
it is not always to be reproved in giving of judgment nor in vengeance taking,	algates it is nat to repreve in yevynge of juggement ne in vengeance takyng,
for although it be so that all tarrying is bothersome,	for al be it so that alle tariyng be anoyful,
And also men say that that judge is wise fhat soon understands a matter and judges at leisure;	And eek men seyn that thilke juge is wys that soone understondeth a matiere and juggeth by leyser;
For the common proverb says thus: `He that soon judges, soon shall repent.'	For the commune proverbe seith thus: `He that soone deemeth, soone shal repente.'
in so little time that it would be to our advantage.	in so litel tyme that it were profitable.
But certainly, to begin war, or suddenly to do vengeance, we can not decide	But certes, for to moeve werre, ne sodeynly for to doon vengeaunce, we may nat demen
so that they can defend as well thy body as thy house.	so that they may as wel thy body as thyn hous defende.
And after that, we advise that in thy house thou set sufficient garrison	And after that, we conseille that in thyn hous thou sette sufficeant garnisoun
that thou not lack any spy nor guard in order to save thy person.	that thou ne wante noon espie ne wacche thy persone for to save.
that right away thou do thy best efforts in keeping of thy own self in such a way	that right anon thou do thy diligence in kepynge of thy propre persone in swich a wise
Wherefore, Melibeus, this is our opinion: we advise you above all things	Wherfore, Melibeus, this is oure sentence: we conseille yow aboven alle thyng
for the which reasons it would be a very great peril to err in this matter.	for the whiche resouns it were a ful greet peril to erren in this matiere.
and also because of the great riches and power of both the parties,	and eek by resoun of the grete richesse and power of the parties bothe,
and also by reason of the great damages that in time coming	and eek by resoun of the grete damages that in tyme comynge
because of the wrong and of the wickedness that has been done,	by cause of the wrong and of the wikkednesse that hath be doon,
is a very serious thing and an important matter,	is a ful hevy thyng and an heigh matiere,
"Gentlemen, the urgent matter for which we are assembled in this place	"Lordynges, the nede for which we been assembled in this place
by leave and by advice of others that were wise, and said:	by leve and by conseil of othere that were wise, and seide:
Up rose then an advocate that was wise,	Up roos thanne an advocat that was wys,
and said flatly that he immediately should avenge himself on his foes and begin war.	and seiden outrely that he anon sholde wreken hym on his foes and bigynne werre.
greatly Melibee of might, of power, of riches, and of friends, despising the power of his adversaries,	greetly Melibee of myght, of power, of richesse, and of freendes, despisynge the power of his adversaries,
made an outward show of weeping, and worsened and much aggravated this matter in praising	maden semblant of wepyng, and empeireden and agreggeden muchel of this matiere in preisynge
that just as maladies are cured by their contraries, just so shall men cure war by vengeance.	that right as maladies been cured by hir contraries, right so shul men warisshe werre by vengeaunce.
Almost in just the same way the physicians answered, save that they said a few words more:	Almoost right in the same wise the phisiciens answerden, save that they seyden a fewe woordes moore:
she shall be whole and sound as soon as is possible."	she shal be hool and sound as soone as is possible."
we shall do such diligent work from day to night that with the grace of God	we shullen do so ententif bisynesse fro day to nyght that with the grace of God
But certainly, as to the curing of your daughter, although it be so that she is perilously wounded,	But certes, as to the warisshynge of youre doghter, al be it so that she perilously be wounded,
therefore unto our art it is not fitting to nourish war nor to support warring factions.	wherfore unto oure art it is nat pertinent to norice werre ne parties to supporte.
one same surgeon heals them both;	oon same surgien heeleth hem bothe;
because of which it happens many times and often that when two men have each one wounded the other,	wherfore it happeth many tyme and ofte that whan twey men han everich wounded oother,
where we are employed, and to our patients that we do no damage,	where as we been withholde, and to oure pacientz that we do no damage,
and to Melibeus said as you can hear:	and to Melibeus seyde as ye may heere:
A surgeon, by permission and assent of such as were wise, stood up	A surgien, by licence and assent of swiche as weren wise, up roos
but nevertheless, yet he asked their advice upon this matter.	but nathelees, yet axed he hire conseil upon this matiere.
ready to do vengeance upon his foes, and desired that the war should begin very soon;	redy to doon vengeaunce upon his foes, and sodeynly desired that the werre sholde bigynne;
And by the manner of his speech it seemed that in heart he bore a cruel anger,	And by the manere of his speche it semed that in herte he baar a crueel ire,
And when this folk were assembled together, this Melibeus in sorrowful manner showed them his case.	And whan this folk togidre assembled weren, this Melibeus in sorweful wise shewed hem his cas.
There came also very many subtle flatterers and wise advocates learned in the law.	Ther coomen also ful many subtille flatereres and wise advocatz lerned in the lawe.
more for dread than for love, as it often happens.	moore for drede than for love, as it happeth ofte.
and therewithal there came some of his neighbors that did him reverence	and therwithal ther coomen somme of his neighebores that diden hym reverence
such as surgeons, physicians, old folk and young, and some of his old enemies reconciled	as surgiens, phisiciens, olde folk and yonge, and somme of his olde enemys reconsiled
Then, by the advice of his wife Prudence, this Melibeus had called up a great congregation of folk,	Thanne, by the conseil of his wyf Prudence, this Melibeus leet callen a greet congregacion of folk,
Solomon says, `Do all thy business by taking advice, and thou shalt never repent.'"	Salomon seith, `Werk alle thy thynges by conseil, and thou shalt never repente.'"
and hearken what they say in advising, and govern yourself according to their advice."	and herkneth what they seye in conseillyng, and yow governe after hire sentence.
"Have summoned," said Prudence, "all thy true friends and of thy family those that are wise. Tell your case,	"Lat calle," quod Prudence, "thy trewe freendes alle and thy lynage whiche that been wise. Telleth youre cas,
so grievously that I know not what to do."	so grevously that I noot what to doone."
"are true and furthermore beneficial, but truly my heart is troubled with this sorrow	"been sothe and therto profitable, but trewely myn herte is troubled with this sorwe
To these foresaid things answered Melibeus unto his wife Prudence: "All thy words," said he,	To thise forseide thynges answerde Melibeus unto his wyf Prudence: "Alle thy wordes," quod he,
just so it is done; blessed be the name of our Lord!'"	right so it is doon; blessed be the name of oure Lord!'"
and in his body endured and received very many a grievous tribulation, yet said he thus:	and in his body endured and receyved ful many a grevous tribulacion, yet seyde he thus:
Remember the patient Job. When he had lost his children and his earthly property,	Remembre yow upon the pacient Job. Whan he hadde lost his children and his temporeel substance,
as in the loss of our other earthly goods, have patience.	as in the los of oure othere goodes temporels, have pacience.
Wherefore we should, as well in the death of our children	Wherfore us oghte, as wel in the deeth of oure children
and the small worms to the tree, just so sorrow does harm to the heart.	and the smale wormes to the tree, right so anoyeth sorwe to the herte.
Solomon says that just as moths in the sheep's fleece do harm to the clothes,	Salomon seith that right as motthes in the shepes flees anoyeth to the clothes,
He says also thus, that sorrow in heart slays very many a man.	He seith eek thus, that sorwe in herte sleeth ful many a man.
it conserves him flourishing in his age; but truly sorrowful heart makes his bones dry.'	it hym conserveth florissynge in his age; but soothly sorweful herte maketh his bones drye.'
Remember you that Jesus son of Sirach says, `A man that is joyous and glad in heart,	Remembre yow that Jhesus Syrak seith, `A man that is joyous and glad in herte,
whom thou hast lost, for therein is no remedy.'	which that thou hast lorn, for therinne is no boote.'
and this is more wisdom than to weep for thy friend	and this is moore wysdom than for to wepe for thy freend
and when thou hast lost thy friend, make an effort to get another friend;	and whan thou hast forgoon thy freend, do diligence to gete another freend;
nor too much dry; although the tears come to thine eyes, let them not fall;	ne to muche drye; although the teeris come to thyne eyen, lat hem nat falle;
`When thy friend is dead,' said he, `let not thine eyes be too moist of tears,	`Whan that thy frend is deed,' quod he, `lat nat thyne eyen to moyste been of teeris,
Moderation in weeping should be considered in the light of the lore that Seneca teaches us:	Mesure of wepyng sholde be considered after the loore that techeth us Senek:
But though moderate weeping is granted, excessive weeping certainly is forbidden.	But though attempree wepyng be ygraunted, outrageous wepyng certes is deffended.
with those who make joy and weep with such folk as weep.'	with hem that maken joye and wepen with swich folk as wepen.'
The Apostle Paul unto the Romans writes, `One shall rejoice	The Apostle Paul unto the Romayns writeth, `Man shal rejoyse
Prudence answered: "Certainly, I know well that moderate weeping is in no way forbidden to him who is sorrowful,	Prudence answerde: "Certes, wel I woot attempree wepyng is no thyng deffended to hym that sorweful is,
Jesus Christ, our Lord, himself wept for the death of Lazarus his friend."	Jhesu Crist, oure Lord, hymself wepte for the deeth of Lazarus hys freend."
who has such a good reason to weep?	that hath so greet a cause for to wepe?
This Melibeus answered immediately and said, "What man," said he, "should stint of his weeping	This Melibeus answerde anon and seyde, "What man," quod he, "sholde of his wepyng stente
as well as he abides the death of his own self.'"	as wel as he abideth the deeth of his owene propre persone.'"
but, certainly, he should suffer it in patience	but, certes, he sholde suffren it in pacience
Seneca says: `The wise man shall not take too great discomfort for the death of his children,	Senek seith: `The wise man shal nat take to greet disconfort for the deeth of his children,
you ought not, for her death, to destroy yourself.	ye ne oughte nat, as for hir deeth, youreself to destroye.
And, even if it were so that she right now were dead,	And, al were it so that she right now were deed,
For truly it does not befit a wise man to make such a sorrow.	For sothe it aperteneth nat to a wys man to maken swich a sorwe.
"Alas, my lord," said she, "why do you make yourself to be like a fool?	"Allas, my lord," quod she, "why make ye youreself for to be lyk a fool?
and when she saw her opportunity, she said to him in this manner:	and whan she saugh hir tyme, she seyde hym in this wise:
to weep and cry as for a certain amount of time,	for to wepe and crie as for a certein space,
For which reason this noble wife Prudence allowed her husband	For which resoun this noble wyf Prudence suffred hir housbonde
and pray her of her weeping to stint."	and preyen hire of hir wepyng for to stynte."
and then shall one do his best efforts with amiable words to comfort her,	and thanne shal man doon his diligence with amyable wordes hire to reconforte,
until she has wept her fill as for a certain time,	til she have wept hir fille as for a certein tyme,
"He is a fool that stops the mother from weeping on the death of her child	"He is a fool that destourbeth the mooder to wepen in the deeth of hire child
This noble wife Prudence remembered the saying of Ovid, in his book	This noble wyf Prudence remembred hire upon the sentence of Ovide, in his book
but nevertheless he began to cry and the longer he wept the more he wept.	but nat forthy he gan to crie and wepen evere lenger the moore.
Prudence, his wife, insofar as she dared, besought him to stop his weeping.	Prudence, his wyf, as ferforth as she dorste, bisoghte hym of his wepyng for to stynte,
like a mad man tearing his clothes, began to weep and cry.	lyk a mad man rentynge his clothes, gan to wepe and crie.
When Melibeus had returned into his house, and saw all this mischief, he,	Whan Melibeus retourned was into his hous, and saugh al this meschief, he,
and in her mouth -- and left her for dead, and went away.	and in hire mouth -- and leften hire for deed, and wenten awey.
this is to say, in her feet, in her hands, in her ears, in her nose,	this is to seyn, in hir feet, in hire handes, in hir erys, in hir nose,
and beat his wife, and wounded his daughter with five mortal wounds in five different places --	and betten his wyf, and wounded his doghter with fyve mortal woundes in fyve sondry places --
and by windows have entered,	and by wyndowes been entred,
His wife and also his daughter has he left within his house of which the doors were tightly shut.	His wyf and eek his doghter hath he left inwith his hous, of which the dores weren faste yshette.
Upon one day it happened that he for his pleasure went into the fields to amuse himself.	Upon a day bifel that he for his desport is went into the feeldes hym to pleye.
a daughter who was called Sophie.	a doghter which that called was Sophie.
A young man called Melibeus, mighty and rich, begot upon his wife, who was called Prudence,	A yong man called Melibeus, myghty and riche, bigat upon his wyf, that called was Prudence,
