Then I conclude thus, since God of heaven
"Of that liquid, if it be your wish."
"Tell me the name of the secret stone."
"Let no man busy himself to seek this art,
Unless it be with his brother's knowledge";
But waste all that you can steal and carry away.
Though you search forever, you shall never find it.
Lo! such a profit is in this pleasing game,
That in good faith I believe that it is
After that day; and when this priest should
By God, they would have so great envy
And were it not for the act of friendship that before this you did
And as I may deserve (to have) it from you,
Was never bird more glad at daybreak,
With these three bars, which we have wrought,
And in the water groped noisily about to and fro,
As he did before -- and all was nothing but a trick;
He seemed friendly to those that did not know him,
Is there any copper here?" said he.
And into the crucible it quickly fell.
To him right away, and his powder cast in
And this canon, at exactly the same time,
Some other day in my absence to try out
Was this priest, when he saw it was so.
And from the fire he took up his material,
He took the chalk and shaped it in the manner
How our business shall thrive and succeed.
He thought all the coals equally good,
Until the coals began to burn fast.
This is not arranged as it ought to be;
It distresses me when I speak of him.
And therein was put of silver filings
To lay all the coals above
And his master shut the door quickly,
For ever to appear amongst folk.
In the name of Christ, to become an alchemist.
And gave these three ounces to the canon;
"Sir," said he to the priest, "have your man go
He has betrayed folks many a time;
Therefore, to go to the conclusion,
How he can bring Christ's people to mischief.
By Saint Mary, for that I pray you heartily."
And sir," said he, "now some of my secrets,
"What!" said this canon, "should I be untrue?
And took his leave, and went forth on his way,
This false canon came upon one day
In Londoun was a preest, an annueleer,
That among Cristes apostelles twelve
But worshipful chanons religious,
Whanne he commune shal with any wight,
Ther is a chanoun of religioun
But every thing thah shines like gold
To bring our experiment to an entirely different state,
"By God," said one, "something of our metal
"Well," said my lord, "there is no more to do;
Some said it was due to the making of the fire;
And some of them sink into the ground --
Now he is gone, I dare say boldly --
And if a man will ask them privily
They would sell them and spend it on this craft.
To be relieved by him afterward.
Ah! Nay! Let be; the philosophers' stone,
Yet I forgot to make enumeration
In learning of this mysterious foolish lore,
For all the wealth he spends on this
The first spirit is called quicksilver,
Clay made with horse or man's hair, and oil
Our lamps burning both night and day,
Our urinals and our retorts,
And all the expenditure, in the name of twenty devils,
Of quicksilver, called raw mercury?
And salt put in, and also pepper,
Our terms are so scholarly and so strange.
And when he through his madness and folly
That slippery science has made me so bare
All that I had I have lost thereby,
Now I wish to God my wit might suffice
Since he is gone, may the foul fiend kill him!
Thou slanderest me here in this company,
This Canon drew himself nearer and heard every thing
Or ten, or twelve, or many greater sums,
"Peter!" said he, "God give it bad luck,
Since he is so crafty and so sly.
That which is done too much, it will not turn out
It is all dirty and tattered also.
He could turn all completely upside down,
"Well," said our Host, "I pray thee, tell me then,
He has taken on him many a great enterprise,
Thy lord is wise, and as I can well judge.
Because I wanted to overtake you,
For he had ridden at more than a trot or a walk;
He was by foam all flecked like a magpie.
Before we had ridden a good five miles,
And let him grieve, and weep, and wring his hands, and wail!
For though thy husband be armed in mail,
But eagerly take the governance to yourself.
Griselda, for certainly he shall faille.
In high mastery, and otherwise it would be a pity --
But thing that will not be, let it be still."
To gete thee freendes ay do thy travaille;
Ay clappeth as a mille, I yow consaille.
But evere answereth at the countretaille.
No wedded man so hardy be t'assaille
Whos lyf and al hire secte God mayntene
And for oure beste is al his governaunce.
Receyven al in gree that God us sent;
And herkneth what this auctour seith therfoore.
Unto a lord, oon of the worthieste
Thus hath this pitous day a blisful ende,
Walter hire dooth so feithfully plesaunce
Hire children two, whan she gan hem t'embrace,
Sith I stonde in youre love and in youre grace,
She bothe hire yonge children to hire calleth,
That thou hast lorn noon of thy children tweye.
Til she out of hire mazednesse abreyde.
"This is ynogh, Grisilde myn," quod he;
Moore tendrely, and, to my supposynge,
"How liketh thee my wyf and hire beautee?"
And koude swich honour and reverence,
Right noght was she abayst of hire clothyng,
A ful greet fool is he that on yow leeveth."
And moore plesant, for hire heigh lynage.
Abouten undren gan this erl alighte,
Ne nevere, for no wele ne no wo,
The chambres for t'arraye in ordinaunce
Cam at his heste, and on hire knees hire sette,
And to the peples eres, alle and some,
And to hire housbonde evere meke and stable.
Biforn the folk, ne eek in hire absence,
Agayns his doghter hastily goth he,
Hir fader, that this tidynge herde anoon,
Lat it be stille, and bere it forth with thee."
Remembre yow, myn owene lord so deere,
Naked out of my fadres hous," quod she,
That I yow yaf myn herte in hool entente.
The whiche to me were hard now for to fynde.
"And of youre newe wyf God of his grace
Foryelde it yow; ther is namoore to seye.
The heighe God take I for my witnesse,
With evene herte I rede yow t'endure
Another wyf, and crien day by day;
Ful boistously hath seyd hire this sentence:
Arrayed eek ful fressh in his manere.
But say the maiden should wedded be
This marquis written has in detail
Supposed full well that it had been right so;
How the pope, to restore tranquility for his people,
Made them so that they hated him for this.
Desire in fact, except what her husband would want.
She was always the same in heart and in visage,
But there are folk of such disposition
He would have supposed that by some trickery,
Her little son he would bury in earth
And forth he goes with sorrowful countenance,
I would do it without negligence;
But first sickness, and after, woe and pain.
Right so I intend to deal with him secretly.
"Now say they thus: `When Walter is gone,
O needless was she put to the test!
Before she was with child, but, as God would,
Were changed; but he never could find her
He should take it and explain to her this matter,
As lords do, when they will have their will;
Bury this little body in some place
I believe that to a nurse in this case
And in her lap this little child she laid
Suspect his face, suspect his word also;
But men must by necessity unto their desires obey,
In important matters, and also such folk well can
Nor change my heart to another place."
She said, "Lord, all is subject to your pleasure.
"And yet, God knows, this is full hateful to me;
They say, to them it is great shame and woe
In which I have put you, as I believe,
To test a wife when there is no need,
This marquis in his heart longs so
People to save and every wrong to amend.
The public good could she promote.
Thus Walter lowly -- nay, but royally --
So benign and so worthy of reverence,
And worshipful that folk where she was born,
Conducted her; and thus the day they spend
A crown on her head they have placed,
Whoever loves me; there is no more to say."
But as you desire yourself, right so desire I.
"I say this: are you ready (to submit) with good heart
But shortly forth this matter to pursue,
Their negotiation, which you shall after hear,
I will do nothing, you are my lord so dear;
And all that pleases me, I dare well say
And to the marquis she fetched her father.
Beside the threshold, in an ox's stall,
She thought, "I will stand with other maidens,
With many a sound of varied melody,
Approaches, when this wedding should be,
Will he not wed? Alas! Alas, the times!
Of so young age, as well in manner as deed.
That child may do to father's reverence.
And in great reverence and charity
But to speak of virtuous beauty,
Had their beasts and their dwellings
Commands the feast to prepare,
For yet always the people somewhat dreaded,
For since I must forgo my liberty
I entrust to him; he may do as he pleases.
To wed, as soon as ever I can.
Their meek prayer and their pitiful manner
Born of the most noble and of the greatest (in rank)
In creeps age always, as still as stone,
That you would desire to be a wedded man;
Yet for as much as you, my lord so dear,
He to the marquis said as you shall hear:
Such as to hawk and hunt on every side.
Moreover he was, to speak of lineage,
It seems to me a thing irrelevant,
Piedmont and the country of Saluces,
As Lynyan did with philosophy,
And therefore will I obey you,
And let not thy tale put us to sleep.
This day I heard not one word from your tongue.
Who helps him to waste and to consume
"Well better is a rotten apple out of the store
Even though he knows how to play on guitar or fiddle.
That could better throw a pair of dice
He loved the tavern better than the shop.
And of a craft of food merchants was he.
But `a true jest is a bad jest,' as the Fleming says.
And many a Jack of Dover (a kind of pie) hast thou sold
I heard a miller better set to work (tricked).
"Ha! ha!" said he, "For Christ's passion,
Thou hast paid well for my living expenses.
Every one of you did nobly to the other.
The sorrow of Dorigen he told him also;
"Yes, certainly, well and truly," said he.
For surely my debt shall be repaid
At specific days, year by year, to pay,
Curses the time that ever he was born:
And be you sure, he was so well pleased
For any promise, and here I take my leave,
To you, and also I see well your distress,
Who commanded her to keep all that she had promised,
But thus they met, by chance or luck,
And when you have heard the tale, judge.
"Go forth right now with Dorigen," he said,
Than you should (do anything but) keep and save your pledged word.
Answered and said as I shall tell you:
Intending ever that she would die.
The same of noble Portia I can tell;
That for a similar case deprived herself of her life?
O Scedasus, it is a very great pity
There shall no person defile, if I can (help it)."
To live when she had lost her good name?
Than be defiled, as it seems to me.
That loved a maiden, called Stymphalides,
And drowned themselves, as the books tell.
When thirty tyrants, full of cursedness,
Save only death or else dishonor;
She weeps, wails, all one day or two,
But well I know the rocks are away."
And in my hand you pledged your word
You slay me guiltless for sheer pain.
And when he saw his time, immediately he,
Whether he shall have his love or fare badly,
And in which planet's face and term (zodiacal divisions), and everything;
And his table for computing motions (of the planets)
That the rocks of Brittany were away,
And prays him to work diligently
But now in Capricorn he alights down,
His woeful heart of suffering had relief.
This wide world, which men say is round,
These amorous folk sometime must have their rest."
They sat still, and no person (was there) but these three.
Then he saw knights jousting in a plain;
Aurelius in his life saw never a one.
He told them all that was in their intention.
To Orleans that he leaped up immediately,
To man's sight, that all the rocks black
Sometimes a vine, and grapes white and red;
"My brother shall be cured speedily;
Had covertly left upon his desk;
That while he was at Orleans in France --
He dared say any word of this matter.
But dances, jousts, makes her good cheer;
As he that was of chivalry the flower,
Lord Phoebus, see the tears on my cheek,
At no faster speed as you for these two years.
Which shall be in the sign of the Lion,
Yet empress above him is she),
Lo, lord! My lady has sworn my death
He knew not what he spoke, but thus he said;
This is as much to say that it was night --
And with a sorrowful heart he thus answered:
Have here my pledged word, in all that is in my power."
But after that in play thus she said:
Have mercy, sweet, or you will make me die!"
Providing that I knew it might gladden your heart,
In such a manner as a man that asks for grace;
Songs, complaints, roundels, virelays,
Who was called Aurelius,
As to my judgement, than is the month of May.
After dinner they go to dance,
This garden full of leaves and of flowers;
They lead her by rivers and by springs,
But that same God that made wind to blow
Have rocks slain, although their names are forgotten,
But, Lord, these grisly fiendish black rocks,
And cast her eyes downward from the brink.
And often with her friends she walks
Has sent her letters home (telling) of his welfare,
All to make her leave her sadness.
As do these noble wives when it pleases them.
That was called Arveragus of Kayrrud,
The which accords to the law of love.
To live in ease, promised her forbearance,
You shall learn it, whether you want to or not;
Women, by nature, desire liberty,
Sir, I will be your humble true wife --
Against her will, nor show her jealousy,
But at the last she, for his worthiness,
Here begins the Franklin's Tale.
I learned never rhetoric, certainly;
These old noble Bretons in their days
"The lion sits in his ambush always
According to the text of Christ, Paul, and John,
Where thou shalt know of our secrets
Is this your will in earnest that you say?"
I paid at our court the fine for thy punishment."
I have not twelve pence within my possession.
To such thing as men will bring against me?"
Upon pain of excommunication, look that thou be
Or I will summon her unto our court;
Here may you see, my own dear brother,
Ask him thyself, if thou not believe me;
The devil have all, both horses and cart and hay!"
And right at the entrance of the town,
My troth will I hold to my brother,
For thou shalt, by thine own experience,
Sometime we dissemble, and sometimes we arise
When he withstands our temptation,
Without him we have no power, certainly,
And yet I gained nothing in this day.
A lousy conjurer can deceive thee,
I supposed you were truly a yeoman.
"Brother," said he, "wilt thou that I thee tell?
What I can get in private secretly,
My lord is hard to me and niggardly,
"Now, brother," said this summoner, "I you pray,
This summoner, who was as full of idle speech
I am unknown in this country;
Said this yeoman, "Wilt thou travel far today?"
Rode to summon an old widow, an old crone,
Certainly he knew of more ways of stealing
Or Jakke, or Rauf, or whoever it was
He could summon, on pain of excommunication,
And tell everything, my own master dear."
For though this Summoner were mad as a hare,
For ere the bishop caught them with his crozier,
Of robbing churches, and of wills,
Our Host answered, "Quiet, no more of this!"
In this company we will have no arguments.
But if it pleases this company,
No churlish word as yet to him spoke he.
He said, "Since I must begin the game,
And shortly to tell as it was,
Whosoever may be rebel to my judgment
Our Host arose, and was the rooster of us all (awakened us).
And that he would be our governor,
I will myself gladly ride with you,
On the way to Canterbury, that is what I mean,
Hold up your hands, without more speech."
For truly, it is no comfort nor mirth
For by my word, if I shall not lie (I must say),
He was a large man with prominent eyes --
Also I pray you to forgive it to me,
Every single word, if it be in his power,
And after that I will tell of our journey
To win silver, as he very well knew how;
In one day he got himself more money
There was no other pardoner like him.
With hair unbound, save for his cap, he rode all bare-headed.
This Summoner harmonized with him in a strong bass;
In his control he had as he pleased
And if he found anywhere a good fellow,
Can call out "Walter" as well as the pope can.
Nor of the knobs sitting on his cheeks.
There was a SUMMONER with us in that place,
In youth he had learned a good craft:
There was no farm manager, nor herdsman, nor other servant,
He well knew how to keep a granary and a storage bin;
Or live as economically as it pleased him to desire;
Now is not that a very fair grace of God
And yet he had a thumb of gold, indeed.
And moreover broad, as though it were a spade.
A SUMMONER, and a PARDONER also,
He loved God best with all his whole heart
He would rebuke him sharply at that time.
So that the wolf did not make it go wrong;
And it is a shame, if a priest is concerned:
In sickness or in trouble to visit
He was gracious, and wonderfully diligent,
And on her feet a pair of sharp spurs.
And she had been three times at Jerusalem;
Her kerchiefs were very fine in texture;
Since in medicine gold is a restorative for the heart,
Averroes, John the Damascan, and Constantine,
The cause known, and the source of his (patient's) harm,
To speak of medicine and of surgery,
His harbors, and positions of his moon, his navigation,
About his neck, down under his arm.
He knew how to roast, and boil, and broil, and fry,
For they had enough possessions and income,
And they were all clothed in one livery
In his hall his dining table always
His house was never without baked pies
As to his temperament, he was dominated by the humor blood.
He had in Year Books all the cases and decisions
He seemed such, his words were so wise.
He took most care and paid most heed to study.
For he would rather have at the head of his bed
Truly, he was a worthy man indeed,
His boots were buckled handsomely and elegantly.
Which was round as a bell fresh from the clothespress.
For though a widow had not a shoe,
To have acquaintance with sick lepers.
And certainly he had a merry voice:
For to give to a poor order (of friars)
Very well beloved and familiar was he
He was not pale as a tormented spirit.
And to fasten his hood under his chin,
Always to pore upon a book in the cloister,
This same Monk let old things pass away,
There was a MONK, an extremely fine one,
It was almost nine inches broad, I believe;
Caught in a trap, if it were dead or bled.
Of grease, when she had drunk her drink.
In the manner of Stratford at the Bow,
A Christopher-medal of bright silver on his breast.
He carried under his belt very properly
He knew how to make songs and well compose (the words),
And he had been for a time on a cavalry expedition
He wore a tunic of coarse cloth
At one time with the lord of Balat
No Christian man of his rank so often.
To ride out, he loved chivalry,
But nonetheless, while I have time and opportunity,
Of various sorts of people, by chance fallen
And specially from every shire's end
When the West Wind also with its sweet breath,
And Emelye loves him so tenderly,
Come near, and take your lady by the hand."
Let your womanly pity now be seen.
And look now, where most sorrow is herein,
Of the welfare of him, who loved them so well?
Than when his name is faded because of age,
And take it well what we may not escape,
Nothing helps there; all goes that same way.
Eventually it is worn away as it lies by the way.
That types of being and natural processes
Then one can by this order well discern
In definite bounds, from which they may not flee.
Before any word came from his wise breast,
To have alliance with certain countries,
I will not tell also how they go
Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,
Nor how she swooned when men made the fire,
Nor how the fire was laid first with straw,
Maple, thorn, beech, hazel, yew, dogwood --
Much labor and full great preparation
Which was all spread with black, and wonderfully high
There sat folk, of which one carried his (Arcite's) shield,
With waving beard and rough hair sprinkled with ashes,
And of the same material he clad Arcite;
He would make a fire in which the rite
Duke Theseus, with all his careful attention,
"Right as there died never a man," said he,
To Troy. Alas, the lamentation that was there,
When their husbands are gone from them,
Nor do I wish to tell such beliefs
Only the intellect, nothing else,
In this world right now I know no one
"I have here with my cousin Palamon
Alas, the death! Alas, my Emelye!
And Palamon, who was his dear cousin.
And every muscle down in his breast
The breast of Arcite swells, and the pain
The victory (is given) as well to one side as to the other,
Nor to be led by force unto the stake
Medicines made of herbs, and also of sage
Although this accident had happened,
The blood was so run in his face.
And was all his source of pleasure, in his heart.
Are in their happiest state for joy of dan Arcite.
What now can fair Venus do above?
That must no more go again to fight?
And in the rescue of this Palamon
As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite.
Many times these two Thebans have
There strong steeds stumble, and down goes all,
In goes the sharp spur into the flank.
So evenly were they chosen, as I estimate.
With red banner is entered right away;
One after another, according to their rank.
"God save such a lord, that is so good
That shall be placed on either side;
No man therefore, upon punishment of loss of life,
A herald on a scaffold made a "Ho!"
The great Theseus, who was awakened of his sleep
The palace full of people everywhere,
Nailing heads to the spear-shafts, and buckling helms;
There was in hostelries all about,
Great was the feast in Athens that day,
Though Mars shall help his knight, yet nonetheless
Mine is the ruin of the high halls,
"My dear daughter Venus," said Saturn,
Until the pale Saturn the hostile,
Very low and faint, that said thus, "Victory!"
And also the doors, clattered very fast,
Eternal fire I will provide before thee (on your altar).
For that same fire that once burned thee,
I am young and ignorant, as thou knowest,
For that same pain and that same hot fire
"O strong god, who in the cold reigns
I put me in thy protection,
But unto which of them I may not tell.
For she did not know what it signified,
But suddenly she saw a curious sight,
Or if my destiny is shaped so
For those three forms that thou hast in thee.
Which Acteon paid for cruelly.
And did her duties, as men can behold
Washed her body with water of a well.
Up rose the sun, and up rose Emelye
Full piteously, with all due ceremony,
I will do sacrifice and kindle fires.
Of Emelye, and die in thy service.
Consider all this and have pity upon my pain,
Thou maker of joy of the mount of Citheron,
With pious heart and with a noble disposition,
Nor who speaks most feelingly of love;
He feasts them, and does such great labor
Were gathered in this noble company,
His beard had well begun to spring;
A short cloak hanging upon his shoulder,
He had a hundred lords in his company,
His long hair was combed behind his back;
And he looked about like a griffin (with an eagle's head),
One of them will be well armed on his legs,
Were it in England or elsewhere,
To speak of knighthood of (the deeds of) their hand,
But I will stop speaking of Theseus a little while,
A woman in childbirth was before her;
There I saw many another wonderful story,
I mean not the goddess Diana,
To tell you all the description.
And over his head there shine two figures
Although at that same time they were unborn,
He lay down full low under the wheel.
The corpse in the woods, with (its) throat cut;
Strife, with bloody knife and sharp menacing.
Every pillar, to support the temple,
Wrought all of burnished steel, of which the entry
In that same cold, frosty region
Before her stood her son Cupid;
One or two examples here suffice,
Nor yet the great strength of Hercules --
Of love, which I recounted and shall recount,
That love's servants endure in this life;
Has Theseus had made in noble style.
He has eastward, upon the gate above,
Eastward there stood a gate of white marble,
Of Theseus, who goes (about) so busily
The joy that is made in the place
And as God may surely have pity on my soul
All ready to decide the right to her by battle.
As is ordained for him, and listen in what way;
I speak for my sister Emelye,
Nor make war upon me at any time,
I know it by my own experience very long ago,
Their wages and their fees for their service!
And could have lived royally in Thebes,
He began to look up with bright eyes
And softly to himself he said, "Fie
He has considered shortly, in brief,
For they were gentle men of high rank,
And said, "This is a brief (easy) decision.
I make plainly my confession
Or slay him first, for though thou little knowest it,
As it would be in a properly conducted duel,"
But who they were, he knew nothing.
And (flee) over a brook, and so forth on his way.
The day was clear, as I have told before this,
I mean this now in regard to mighty Theseus,
The destiny, general minister,
And after that, with sharp strong spears
And thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy!
And on his horse, alone as he was born,
O Cupid, devoid of all kindness to others!
And bring armor right enough for thee;
Rather thou shouldest die of my hand.
I doubt not that either thou shalt dye,
And art of my blood, and sworn to be in my confidence,
A long time, and afterwards he leaped up.
And in addition to all this, to slay me utterly
That he who is my mortal enemy,
How long, Juno, through thy cruelty,
Now up, now down, like a bucket in a well.
It is very good for a man to act calmly,
And from his war horse, with an eager heart,
Has ridden into the fields to amuse himself,
And fiery Phoebus rises up so bright
Toward Thebes, to pray his friends
That all that night, though men would shake him,
The third night (as old books say,
Wasted by suffering, what for woe and for distress.
From year to year, very secretly, his income;
They said that it would be a act of charity
For he was young and mighty indeed,
To Athens he is gone the nearest way.
That, since his face was so disfigured
And with that word Arcite awoke and leaped up.
At Thebes, in his country, as I said,
Not only like the lover's malady
His eyes sunken and grisly to behold,
Now judge as it pleases you, you who know (of such things),
In chains and in fetters to be dead;
For jealousy and fear of this Arcite."
The answer to this I leave to theologians,
"What (sort of) governance is in this foreknowledge,
Then said he, "O cruel gods that govern
And art a lord, thy advantage is great,
Thou walkest freely now in Thebes,
Since I can not see you, Emelye,
But he does not know which is the right way to it,
That gives them full often in many a manner
Thou mayest sometime attain thy desire.
Would have sufficed right enough for me.
He said, "Alas that day that I was born!
In any country of this Theseus,
And had known him at Thebes year after year,
Since that same time that they were little children,
Love, if it please thee, for I love and always shall;
To stand in her good graces; no more shall I;
Knowest thou not well the old clerks' saying,
"Thou shalt," said he, "be rather false than I;
To love my lady, whom I love and serve,
That never, though we had to die by torture,
This Palamon, when he heard those words,
Where this lady roamed to and fro,
And with that he fell down on his knees,
"Cousin, truly, concerning this opinion
Why didst thou cry out? Who has done thee offence?
That he was born, full often he said, "alas!"
And Palamon, this woeful prisoner,
She gathers flowers, mixed white and red,
The season urges on every gentle heart,
This passes year by year and day by day,
To Athens, to dwell in prison
Of which two one was called Arcite,
Still in that field he took all night his rest,
To do obsequies, as was then the custom.
Until he came to Thebes and dismounted
Unto the town of Athens to dwell,
How Creon was treated by Theseus
With compassionate heart, when he heard them speak.
Of all our lords who are slain,
Who died at Thebes -- cursed be that day! --
Who has not been a duchesse or a queen.
After she had swooned with (so) deadly a countenance,
And of this cry they would not ever stop
This duke, of whom I make mention,
And of the festivity that was at their wedding,
I leave this noble duke riding to Athens,
That there was no one greater under the sun.
He is his slave to whom he has said
Act as if thou were deaf, if thou hear
Comes much harm; thus was me told and taught.
But for little speech well considered
But nonetheless, thus taught me my mother:
Unto the devil, to whom I commit him;
Nor never in all thy life shalt thou speak.
Before you act in any way
Full guiltless, that dare I swear, indeed!
For sorrow of which he broke his musical instruments,
What more do you want? The crow immediately him told,
To hear thy voice? Alas, what song is this?"
I will go to my tale, as I began.
That, because the tyrant is of greater might
Except that the gentle, higher in rank,
The wise Plato says, as you may read,
Deceived was, despite all his attractive qualities.
All these examples I about speak these men
And let him see a mouse go by the wall,
And keep it as cleanly as thou can,
To please her, supposing for such pleasing actions,
But all in vain, for it does not help.
Could not, by a hundred thousand times,
For his amusement, in sign also of victory
Who with his singing walled that city,
He was the most lusty bachelor
To accord and love, and appease many a wrong.
Of this vessel the Cook drank fast, alas!
Yet I would rather pay for the mare
Tell on thy tale; of him I take no account.
Upon this man, by my salvation,
For lack of speech, and down the horse him threw,
The devil of hell set his foot therein!
And (providing) that our Host would (agree), of his courtesy,
Or hast thou with some prostitute all night labored,
A thief might full easily rob and bind him.
Nor legal cases, nor elaborate terms of law.
Said the Shipman, "Here shall he not preach;
Know much that is good, by God's dignity!"
Now Jesus Christ, that of his might may send
And finds her friends whole and sound;
That little while in joy or in pleasure
To England are they come by the direct route,
A thousand fold well more (blissful) than I can tell.
Was put alone and damned to die.
The morning came, and Alla began to prepare himself,
As he that is of Christian folk the flower,
In relief of her long, pitiful pain,
I can not tell their woe until to-morrow,
"Now God," said he, "and his saints bright
Hardly upon her feet she could stand.
And afterward he made his contrary argument:
Now was this child as like unto Custance
A mother he has, but father has he none
This senator has led this child to the feast;
As well to show his high magnificence
That, if I shortly tell shall and plainly,
In holy works ever, as was her special gift of God.
In which Custance sits full piteously.
For which this Emperor has sent at once
Until Christ's mother -- blessed be she always! --
To slay that Holofernes in his tent,
That not for the deed sometimes, but for the intention
But blissful Mary helped her right then;
On the point of dying, as I shall tell you soon.
But now will I go unto Custance,
The hand was known that the letter wrote,
And plainly the whole affair he him told
Abundantly for her very long time (of sailing),
And if thou dare not save him, for fear of punishment,
Now, lady bright, to whom all woeful (people) cry,
And into heaven her eyes up she caste.
In the salt sea, although I see not how.
Weep both young and old in all that place
Full often he said, "Alas and woe!"
Her, and her young son, and all her gear,
He sleeps, and he snorts in his way
And therefore to the fiend I thee consign;
And forth he goes; there is nothing more to do.
"Welcome be the dispensation of Christ for evermore
The letter said the queen delivered was
Donegild answered, "Right now, at this time, no;
Unto the king's mother rides quickly,
So long is gone with child, until that quietly
They must take in patience at night
So foreign a creature as his mate.
And after this Jesus, of His mercy,
Great was the fear and also the repentance
That down he fell at once like a stone,
Since a noble heart is filled with pity,
Amongst all the faces in that route?
From false blame, and thou, merciful maid,
Deeper in this, to learn the truth.
Falsely testifies that she has done this thing.
To king Alla was told all this misfortune,
And cut the throat of Hermengild in two,
She would do no sin, in no way.
Against the Scots, as men may well hear;
Custance answered, "Sir, it is Christ's might,
Bent over and old, with eyes fast shut.
And near the castle there dwelt three such (Christians).
In all that land no Christians dared assemble;
She was so diligent, without laziness,
But nonetheless by means of this she was understood.
That thence it would not (move) for the duration of an entire tide;
Who fed the Egyptian Mary in the cave,
With dry feet through the sea passing.
By certain means often, as know clerks,
Men might ask why she was not slain
Banisher of fiends out of man and woman
Unto the cross of Christ thus said she:
They have set her, and told her to learn to sail
Are all hacked to pieces and stabbed at the table,
But all too dear they paid for it before they rise (from the feast).
And thus in mirth and joy I let them remain;
I do not believe the triumph of Julius,
And said his wife was come, without doubt,
That she might have the Christian folk to feast --
Thy instrument thus -- alas the times! --
O serpent under (cover of) femininity,
And to them all she spoke right in this manner:
Because we renounced our faith in Mohammed?
"Lords," said she, "you know each one of you,
She takes pains to make a cheerful appearance;
Was there no astrologer in all thy town?
At the beginning of this dangerous voyage,
Nor at Rome, for the harm wrought by Hannibal
Nor shall I never see you again with my eyes.
And to be bound under subjection
The day is come of her departure;
Well may men know that such great preparation
And all his vassals should christened be,
To get her who has my life in her keeping,
Because there was such difference
To arrange some remedy to save his life .
The strife of Thebes; and of Hercules,
Perhaps in that large book
Entertain them well, and busily seek out
But now to the point let us turn again.
I pray to God to sustain her in honor,
And it so happened that the excellent renown
With them, and also to sell them their goods.
I would right now be without any tales,
And all thy friends flee from thee, alas!
When his tail shall burn in the live coals,
To ask help thou art ashamed in thy heart;
To the Muses that men call Pierides --
How that the cursed king Antiochus
The cruelty of thee, queen Medea,
There may he see the large wounds wide
In one book, he has said them in another.
All my promise, I can say no better.
Let us not grow moldy thus in idleness.
And in part through negligence when we are awake,
Five and forty degrees had climbed on height,
The arc of his twelve-hour day has run
For if I should reckon every vice
Are they, us innocent men to deceive,
He kisses her and embraces her full often,
First when his sight is newly come again,
But, by my father's soul, I thought to have seen
You have some glimpse, and no perfect sight."
Was no thing better, to make you to see,
Unless I would speak crudely;
Pulled up the smock, and in he thrust.
For well I know that you mistrust me,
To eat some of the small green pears.
"You love I best, and shall, and none other."
That I would grant him his sight again,
I reckon all the villainy
Why though he made a temple, God's house?
With martyrdom they proved their constancy.
Yet shall we women face it out boldly,
In reproof of both her and many others."
Fall upon your bodies yet to-night!
Filled with wisdom and with worldly glory,
How in his grisly chariot he fetched her --
But little from his declination
And every sign that she could make,
Why speak you thus? But men are always untrue,
Wherefore I will answer in this manner,
For true love; this is without doubt.
I give it to you, draw up deeds as you please;
I had rather die on a knife
And in he hurried, and that in such a way
The garden is enclosed all about;
Were passed [of] the month of [June], it happened
Some wonder by this latchkey shall betide,
Yet was he deceived, and, God knows, so are others
Who had a hand upon her always.
Who loves Damian so graciously
For when he knew it can not be otherwise,
And with all this the fire of jealousy,
Thy gifts under appearance of steadfastness,
And in this way, many a merry day,
Such pleasure has in it to walk and play,
Could not the beauty of it well describe;
This noble January, with all his might,
And also to January he goes as humbly
And craftily this letter down she thrust
And rejoice in her cruel pride,
I care not, for here I him assure
To any woman to get her love,
How he worked, I dare not tell to you,
She tore it all to pieces at the last,
For I am dead if this thing be known."
With all her women unto Damian.
That all you go see this Damian.
But after dinner, as soon as ever I can,
Excused him because of his sickness,
The fourth day completed from noon to noon,
And in a purse of silk which hung on his shirt
Also if thou speak, she will thy woe reveal.
Or else long can he not endure;
In his night-cap, and with his lean neck;
And then he takes a bit of bread soaked in fine claret,
That can work both well and hastily;
He lulls her; he kisses her full often;
And to his private friends thus said he:
Where they attend to their affairs as they pleased
For in this world is no worse pestilence
O perilous fire, that in the bedstraw breeds!
Who carved before the knight full many a day.
And that the night would last evermore.
That he that night in arms would her strain
Her to behold it seemed an enchantment.
Who writes for us that same wedding merry
And Venus laughs upon every person,
And full of instruments and of foods,
Forth comes the priest, with stole about his neck,
That she, this maiden who May was called,
Be not afraid of this, my brother dear,
Swifter than does an arrow out of a bow.
You may repent of the wedded man's life,
This is my dread, and you, my brethren two,
And such great ease and pleasure in marriage
For then, he said, his spirit was at ease.
He said there was a maiden in the town,
That hastily they would come to him;
Her wise self-control, her nobility,
And some were rich and had a bad reputation.
And set it in a common market-place,
"That hinders matrimony, certainly."
This is to say, to do her full pleasure.
But I know best where my shoe pinches me.
And all this requires leisure to find out.
Whether she be wise, or sober, or given to drink,
Seneca, amongst other words wise,
And truly, it is a bold act
That dares presume, or else think it,
And God it knows, though I am unworthy,
To deviate from the word of Solomon.
As every day altercation occurs
And a blossom-filled tree is neither dry nor dead.
Or so that each of them should help the other
There speaks many a man of marriage
For if it so were that I had such bad luck
And also these old widows, God it knows,
You shall rather such a thing discover
I have my body foolishly wasted;
For which this January, of whom I told,
I warn thee, if wisely thou wilt act,
The people of God, and made that same Mordecai
By good counsel of his mother Rebecca,
Or else pray to God to send him
She keeps his goods, and wastes not a bit;
So obedient and so virtuous is she,
And hearken why -- I say not this for nothing --
Such as lands, rents, pasture, or right to use common land,
Will take care of thee better than she that waits always
And yet some clerks say it is not so,
Whereas a wedded man in his estate
And lead his life in joy and in pleasure,
"No other life," said he, "is worth a bean,
Were it for holiness or for dotage
For sorry heart, I can tell no more."
These two months, and no more, by God;
Between Griselda's great patience
I know enough, on evenings and mornings,"
They said, "The man is crazy, my dear brother";
And that he begged them, for God's love,
Who yet lay in a swoon, both pale and wan,
And thought, "Alas, now comes Nowell's flood!"
So that with the stroke he was almost blinded;
This Nicholas was risen to piss,
He coughs first, and knocks then
And I will bring it back to thee very soon."
Why rise you so early? Ay, bless me!
Very often he did renounce love-making,
With dust, with sand, with straw, with cloth, with chips,
He felt a thing all rough and long haired,
"Get done with it," said she, "come on, and hurry up,
"Wilt thou then go thy way with that?" said she.
"Go from the window, you idiot," she said;
"What do you, honey-comb, sweet Alisoun,
Up rises this elegant lover Absolon,
To Alison now I will tell all
And dwell at the granary a day or two;
That is for love always so woebegone,
Down on the ladder stalks Nicholay,
"Now, Pater-noster, quiet!" said Nicholay,
With bread, and cheese, and good ale in a jug,
He weeps, wails, looks wretched;
Help us to escape, or we are dead each one of us!
Men say thus, `send the wise, and say nothing.'
For it is God's own dear command.
Be merry, for the flood will soon pass.'
And hast laid our victuals carefully in them,
I will not tell God's secrets.
A kneading trough, or else a large vat,
"Hast thou not heard," said Nicholas, "also
Thou mayst not act according to thine own ideas;
That Noah's flood was never half so large.
"Nay, Christ forbid it, for his holy blood!"
And when each of them had drunk his part,
Began to sigh deeply, and said, "Alas!
Awake, and think on Christ's passion!
And to the chamber door he turned his attention.
He walked in the fields to look
This carpenter began to bless himself,
How can you sleep all the long day?"
This world is now very ticklish, surely.
He would not answer for anything that might befall.
And right away, without more words,
For Absolon may wail and sing "alas."
He had for his labor nothing but scorn.
He sent her sweetened wine, mead, and spiced ale,
And she answered her husband immediately,
And took his place up by a casement window
This parish clerk, this elegant Absolon,
About farting, and fastidious in his speech.
In twenty different ways could he trip and dance
With St. Paul's window carved on his shoes,
Christ's own works to do,
"No, care thee not about that," said Nicholas.
This Nicholas began to cry for mercy,
For secret love of thee, sweetheart, I die."
She was a primrose, a pig's eye (a flower),
As any swallow sitting on a barn.
Than is the new early-ripe pear tree,
White was her smock, and embroidered all in front
Who advised that man should wed his equal.
Very often his merry throat was blessed.
His Almagest, and books large and small,
Concerning every thing; I can not reckon them all.
A rich churl, who took in boarders,
Of historical matter that concerns nobility,
But told his churl's tale in his manner.
Yet I would not, for the oxen in my plow,
Thou canst say enough about other things."
And therefore if that I misspeak or say (amiss),
And said, "Wait, Robin, my dear brother;
Something to equal the Knight's tale."
When the Knight had thus told his tale,
His daughter, who was called Phanye.
Whom he knew to abound in good judgment,
Such luck that he escaped by means of the rain,
Of which Croesus Cyrus was sorely afraid,
Lucan, to thee this history I commend,
But never groaned he at no stroke but one,
Full secretly has made conspiracy
Of Rome, who fled at this battle.
O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
The which two for all this woe I blame?
Thou were poisoned by thine own folk;
Whom he conquered, and brought them into woe?
Between him and another conqueror;
[Concerning Alexander]
In this affliction he wailed and also wept,
That it tore to pieces his limbs and his skin,
That in his guts it carved so and bit
And because Nicanor and Timotheus
And why he fell from high prosperity,
Sleeping, smote off his head, and from his tent
"Nebuchadnezzar was god," said he;
That put more reigns in subjection,
And in this garden found he two churls
Then he knew well, he had himself deluded,
To set a man that is filled full of vice
Which afterward seemed to him a greet grievance;
This Seneca, of whom I tell,
When might is joined unto cruelty,
His mother he put in piteous situation,
That same clothing that he had worn one day,
Although Nero was as vicious
They leyde hem in his lappe adoun and deyde.
For wo his armes two he gan to byte,
Is ther no morsel breed that ye do kepe?
Whan that his mete wont was to be broght,
Swiche briddes for to putte in swich a cage!
Withinne his prisoun made thee to dye --
They in thy bed han slayn thee by the morwe.
Noght Charles Olyver, that took ay heede
Wel oghten men thy pitous deeth complayne!
Dredeful to kynges and to emperoures,
And wan the land, and hoom to Rome he wente.
This myghty queene may no while endure.
Ne noon Ermyn, ne noon Egipcien,
The regnes heeld, and with hire propre hond
Ay whil that Odenakes dayes laste.
Whan that she leyser hadde; and for to entende
I seye, so worshipful a creature,
Namoore sholde he pleyen thilke game
For ech of hem hadde oother lief and deere,
Ther myghte no thyng in hir armes stonde.
With arwes brode that she to hem sente.
As writen Persiens of hir noblesse,
Lordynges, ensample heerby may ye take
And heryest false goddes cursedly;
That God of hevene hath domynacioun
But Daniel expowned it anoon,
Hys wyf, his lordes, and his concubynes
But Fortune caste hym doun, and ther he lay,
Was he to doon amys or moore trespace;
But sodeynly he loste his dignytee,
Sixty cubites long and sevene in brede,
In which his glorie and his delit he hadde.
Thanne wayteth she her man to overthrowe
Til that his flessh was for the venym blaked.
And as thise clerkes maken mencioun,
Was nevere wight, sith that this world bigan,
He golden apples rafte of the dragoun;
Beware by this example old and plain
And made him as their fool play before them;
But before his hair was clipped or shaven,
But soon shall he weep many a tear,
High on a hill where men could see them.
That God would on his pain have some pity
Three hundred foxes Sampson took for ire,
But to his wives he told his secret,
Had never worldly man so high degree
For though Fortune may harm no angel,
I will bewail in the manner of tragedy
Lo, this explanation ought to suffice enough.
Of which I have a hundred in my cell.
God knows, you pay with no inferior coins!
Though he had a tonsure very prominently upon his head,
A very handsome person indeed.
I vow to God, thou hast a very handsome complexion;
That shall he find that does or says something amiss to her --
Thou darest not defend thy wife's right!'
Will not in church bow to my wife,
And by that precious body of Madrian,
Sir Pardoner, be glad and merry of cheer;
Instead of relics or a container for relics.
Come forth, sir Host, and offer first right now,
To absolve you in the countryside as you ride,
If any of you will, of devotion,
I absolve you, by my high power,
Thou art so false and so unnatural, alas?
Thus ended are these two homicides,
"Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry,
The third he kept clean for his drink.
Only so much as the amount of a seed of wheat,
And prayed him that he would sell him
Of God that should live so merrily as I!"
Then we both can fulfill all our desires,
That, by my troth, I will not betray thee."
But nevertheless, if I can arrange things so
And commanded them to draw and see where it will fall;
Wherefore I advise that among us all straws
To-day that we should have such good fortune?
But each of them was so glad of that sight,
Under a tree, and there he will wait;
Thou spoke right now of that same traitor Death.
`In the presence of an old man, gray upon his head,
Alas, when shall my bones be at rest?
Neither in city nor in any village,
An old and poor man met with them.
To live and die each of them for other,
"Is it such peril to meet with him?
Always be ready to meet him;
And suddenly he was slain last night,
Had set themselves in a tavern to drink,
Seven is my number, and thine is five and three!"
Lo, he forbids such swearing rather
The high God forbad swearing at al,
Sent him a pair of dice of gold in scorn,
To ally you unto any dice-players.
Stilboun, who was a wise ambassador,
Blasphemy of Christ, manslaughter, and waste also
And beyond all this, consider right well
But listen, gentlemen, one word, I pray you,
And namely from the white wine of Lepe
And through thy drunken nose the sound seems
That may go through the gullet softly and sweetly.
Of which the end is death; belly is their god!"
God shall destroy both," as Paul says.
O, if a man knew how many evils
Was bought that same cursed villainy!
He says he can find no difference
The Bible I take as my witness
That it is grisly to hear them swear.
In Flanders once was a company
But listen, gentlemen, in conclusion:
I will not do any labor with my hands,
Concerning this matter this ought to be enough.
I preach of nothing but for greed.
In preaching, so that he shall not escape
And not at all for correction of sin.
And tell a hundred more false tales.
To offer to my relics in this place.
He shall have multiplying of his grain,
As that same holy Jew taught our elders,
If cow, or calf, or sheep, or ox swell
And in Latin I speak a few words,
'Greed is the root of all evil.'
Tell us some moral thing, that we may learn
Or else a draught of fresh and strong ale,
And also thy vessels for analyzing urine and thy flasks,
That gifts of Fortune and of Nature
The Prologue ends.
And told our Host he should to him say
"But nonetheless, this meditation
And therefore, if you wish -- I will not deceive you --
Why should I sow chaff out of my fist,
For every man, save thou, has told his tale.
Said in this manner: "Gentlemen, every one,
Four of the clock it was then, as I suppose,
For be he ignorant man, or else learned,
So prayed for him (Claudius) that he was exiled;
The people immediately suspected in this matter,
And with that word down she fell in a swoon.
Except that she ran first to see her father,
About his neck, as she was accustomed to do.
O gem of chastity, in patience
"Daughter," said he, "Virginia, by thy name,
And when this worthy knight Virginius
And would have proven it as a knight should (by battle),
My servant, who is my slave by right,
Let him be called, and I will gladly hear (the case);
And gave his judgements upon various cases.
Home goes the churl, who is called Claudius.
Secretly, and made him swear
For certainly, not by any force nor by any bribery,
And it so happened that this judge cast his eyes
So that throughout that land they praised her everyone
Let one ensample sufficefor the present,
You fathers and you mothers also as well,
A thief of venison, who has abandoned
Who have lords' daughters in governance,
Because she wanted to flee the company
She spoke, and all her words, long speeches and brief,
As well in spirit as in body chaste was she,
And a rose red, just so with such pigments
Under the moon, which may grow less or grow larger,
When I wish; who can counterfeit my work?
Filled with honor and with worthiness,
And though I do not say the same words
For some of them say more, and some say less,
Or else, certainly, you are too hard to please.
"By God," said he, "for plainly, at one word,
"No more of this, for God's dignity,"
And because he was a knight errent,
Of Bevis of Hampton and sir Guy of Watwick,
If you want to hear any more of it,
His bridle shone like the sun,
His shield was all of gold so red,
A pair of trousers and also a shirt;
Of popes and of cardinals,
His merry men commanded he
Out of a terrible staff-sling.
When I have my armor;
A perilous man of deeds.
An elf-queen for to see,
And sleep under my cloak.
For spurring on the soft grass,
The male thrush made also her lay,
Happened a grievous misfortune.
In truth, as I can tell you,
Moreover he was a good archer;
He had a seemly nose.
In Flanders, far beyond the sea,
"Yes, that is good," said he; "now we shall hear
He in the waist is shaped as well as I;
Said unto another, as you shall hear.
For if thou have as much desire as thou hast might,
Is written for our instruction, indeed;
All willfully, God let him never prosper!"
When I seized you and brought you out of the yard.
Despite all you could do, the cock shall here remain.
Now, good men, I pray you all to listen:
Out of the hive came the swarm of bees.
And also with staves many another man.
Because their husbands lost all their lives --
But supremely dame Pertelote shrieked
For on a Friday, truly, he was slain.
O Venus, who art goddess of pleasure,
Stretching his neck, and held his eyes closed,
This Chauntecleer began to beat his wings,
I have well read in `Dan Burnel the Ass,'
As did your father in the morning.
As has any angel that is in heaven.
This Chauntecleer, when he did espy him,
How they sing well and merrily).
Pass over, for I said it as a joke.
My tale is of a cock, as you may hear,
Or Boethius, or the Bishop Bradwardyn,
Thou were very well warned by thy dreams
Until it had passed  a.m. of the day,
As is the Book of Lancelot of the Lake,
And see the fresh flowers, how they spring;
His seven wives walking by his side,
He clucks when he has found a seed,
And with that word he flew down from the beam,
It makes all my dread die;
That I shall have of this vision
That day that Hector should lose his life,
Warnings of things that shall afterward befall.
"Dame Pertelote, I say you truly,
Of Mercia, how Kenelm dreamed a thing.
And ship and man went under the water
Men dream all the time of owls and of apes,
Thou shalt be drowned; my tale is at an end.'
But on a day, toward the evening time,
And were hanged by the neck-bone.
Murder will out; we see that day by day.
And in this cart he lies gaping upright.
"This man began to fall in suspicion,
And told him in full detail how he was slain,
Thus twice in his sleeping he dreamed;
This man dreamed in his bed, where he lay,
Therefore they must of necessity,
There need be no argument about this;
That has of wisdom such a great renown,
Of worms, before you take your laxatives
The which by nature have the power
"Now sir," said she, "when we fly from the beams,
Of strife, and of dogs, big and little;
Nothing, God knows, but foolishness is in dreams.
For certainly, whatever any woman says,
His color was between yellow and red,
And he answered, and said thus: "Madame,
And so befell that in a dawning,
And companionable, and bore herself so fair
Like azure were his legs and his toes;
That goes in the church on mass-days.
No wine she drank, neither white nor red;
Full sooty was her bedchamber and also her hall,
Was once dwelling in a small cottage,
Be happy, though thou ride upon a nag.
It is no use to tell his opinion.
Therefore, Sir Monk, dan Piers by your name,
He spoke of how Fortune covered with a cloud
When men have been in great wealth and ease,
And God, that sits high in majesty,
Of half a bushel flour, very well baked.
And when she did espy this white thing,
This John started up as fast as ever he could,
Who knew nothing of this foolish strife;
My daughter, who is come from such noble lineage?"
He said, "Thou John, thou pig's-head, awake,
"By God," thought he, "I have gone all wrong.
When thou go homeward by the mill,
This jolly life have these two clerks led
She gropes always further with her hand,
To the cradle, and in his hand seized it,
Now may I say that I am nothing but a fool.
Aleyn answered, "I reckon him not worth a fly."
That in another he shall be relieved.
May a wild fire upon their bodies fall!
This miller has imbibed so much ale
As if he had hoarseness, or had a cold.
His daughter had a bed, all by herself,
Get us some food and drink, and make us good cheer,
My house is small, but you have learned the art of logic;
Both the warden and all our fellows,
Go whistle thou, and I shall catch him here!"
And when the miller saw that they were gone,
Curses come on his hand that tied him so carelessly,
And began to cry "Help!" and "Wellaway!
And to the horse he goes gently;
The more will I steal when I take.
And see how the meal falls down
To grind our grain and carry it home again;
Aleyn spoke first: "All hail, Symond, in faith!
And at the last the warden gave hem leave.
Then were there two young poor scholars,
And on one day it happened, at a time,
Into some worthy family of noble ancestry;
In cradle it lay and was a good looking little boy.
At least they would like their wives to think so.
On holidays before her would he go
A wife he had, come of noble kin;
There was no man, for peril, dared touch him.
There goes a brook, and over that a bridge,
"This drunk Miller has told us here
The devil made a reeve to preach,
And ever since the tap has so run
"Four live coals have we, which I shall describe --
Until it is rotten in rubbish or in straw.
He began to grouch, and criticized it a little.
People do service to Christ and to his saint.
To have respite three days and no more
But half dead, with her neck carved there,
But in that bath her life she must leave,
And he grew angry, and ordered that men should lead her
And taste it well, and stone thou shalt find it,
Cecile answered, "O foolish creature!
Thou hast no other power nor any authority.
Why speakest thou so proudly then to me?"
"O judge, confused in thy folly,
Forasmuch as we do reverence
"And yet wrongful is thy perseverance.
"Of whence?" said she, when she was asked,
And first of all, lo, this was his quesation.
Do sacrifice and burn incense to Jupiter.
With angels full of clearness and of light,
But when they were brought to the place
"Now, Christ's own knights beloved and dear,
He got himself permission of the executioners,
Who questioned them, and knew all their thought,
Perfect in his learning, God's knight.
Of Christ's coming, and teach (him) of His pains,
To whom answered Tiburce, "O sister dear,
"But there is a better life in another place,
Men should burn him in a fire so red
First tell me where I must go, and to what man?"
Said this blissful fair maid dear,
To love a devotion to chastity."
Commends it, and says in this manner:
Until this time, my brother, indeed.
Valerian said: "Two crowns have we,
And when he perceived the fragrance,
Assented to good counsel also,
He gave that one, and after he did give
"I believe all this thing," said Valerian,
And did stand before Valerian.
The fruit of that same seed of chastity
Valerian has gone to the place,
"That from this town stands no more than three miles,
Answered in reply, "If I must trust thee,
Who with great love, whether I wake or sleep,
And privately to him she said at once,
Had next to her flesh clad herself in a hair shirt.
Of Christ, and bore his gospel in her mind.
And just as these scientists write
Comes from "heaven" and "leos," for which rightly
Because she set an example by good teaching;
Wrote the story, and (I) follow her legend,
Of my body, and also by the weight
Be sinful, yet accept my faith.
Not only helpest them that pray thee,
Within the blissful cloister of thy sides
Thy maiden's death, that won by means of her merit
Which is the cause of such great ruin,
He is not aware that the fiend has him in hand.
Who is porter of the gate of pleasures
Another tale;" and with that word he said,
"Well said, by the body of our Lord," said our Host,
"Nay," said this monk, "by God and Saint Martin,
Betray a word of anything that you tell me,
Perhaps I can, in your unhappy situation,
For I may sing `alas and alack
Has labored you since the night began
"Oh my dear cousin, Don John," she said,
And thus he sits until it was past nine o'clock.
To reckon with himself, as it well may be,
Who was so welcome as my lord Don John,
A messenger, and has prayed Don John
He gave to the lord, and then to all his household,
But was as glad of this as a fowl is of day,
This young monk, who had so handsome a face,
Then another must pay for our costs,
Such salutations and courtesies
I pray to God that it may please you;
That each of you must tell at the least
Unless a man is virtuous as well!
In my opinion, there is no one that is here
And next I will speak of Cambalo,
The king's son, of whom I told you.
In which were painted all these false fowls,
Where she with her beak had hurt herself.
And has turned his truth false in this manner.
And to the wood he will go and eat worms;
I believe he had that text in mind,
And said to him thus: `Lo, I am all yours;
When I heard him speak and saw his appearance.
That Fortune would have it that he must depart
And shortly, this business had gone forth so far
Nor so could thank a creature as he did to me!
So ravished, as it seemed, for the joy
`An honest creature and a thief think not alike.'
Very frightened that he might die, as it seemed to me,
That are in accord with nobility in love.
It was so concealed under humble bearing,
Until the falcon prayed her to be still,
That Nature in your natural disposition has set.
And after she started up from her swoon,
Of your malady, if it lay in my power,
Since I see no other creature hunt you.
"What is the cause, if it may be told,
Has understood what this falcon said,
In shape, in all that might reckoned be.
And continually she cried always and shrieked,
I should proceed to the main point,
What for the season and the dawning,
No higher was he when she was ready --
As is her governess, answered her at once,
And slept her first sleep, and then awoke.
Their dreams shall not now be told for me;
The nurse of digestion, the sleep,
The manner and the form of all this matter,
Or, if you wish to bid him go thence,
Which I shall you tell between us two(secretly).
Where men wondered about a horse also,
The service done, they sup all day long.
No man but Launcelot, and he is dead.
And on the dance he goes with Canacee.
Rose from his table, where he sat full high.
Therefore ceases their chattering and their wonder.
Then they speak of Canacee's ring,
That would pierce throughout every thing,
How men might in it see such things.
And said, "He lies, for it is rather like
And said it was like the Pegasus,
Nature nor art could him not amend
Until the knight has taught them the manner
By certain officers appointed for this purpose;
It fails not while it is in your possesion."
Such power has that whatever man you smite
Is this: that if she wishes to wear it
"And in addition to all this, if any fair lady
And return again with twisting of a peg.
This is to say, in four and twenty hours --
Yet say I this, as to his general meaning:
Could not amend one word of his speech.
For marveling at this knight; him to behold
While this king sits thus in his nobility,
I will not tell of their strange stews,
Against the sword of winter, keen and cold.
Exactly March , in the ordinary course of the year.
My English also is insufficient.
That there was nowhere such another man.
In accord with the religion in which he was born
My will is good, and lo, my tale is this."
And Jankyn has won a new gown --
That I can affirm, I say for me,
That equally the sound of it will go,
And to every spoke's end, in this manner,
"My lord," said he, "when the weather is fair,
Now stood the lord's squire at the board,
The rumbling of a fart, and every sound,
Before this day, such a problem.
This false blasphemer who charged me
Is there anything else? Tell me faithfully."
Of holy church -- God amend it soon!"
Blasphemed has our holy convent as well."
You look as if the wood were full of thieves.
Where there dwelt a man of greet honor,
"Ah, false churl," said he, "for God's bones!
A thing that I have hidden in private."
That thou divide it so, my dear brother,
With his false dissimulation.
He would take the sun out of this world.
And yet, God knows, hardly the foundation
But show to me all thy confession."
He made it that the river was so small
His son was slain; there is no more to say.
And right away this angry, cursed wretch
For God's love, drink more temperately!
"Angry Cambises was also a drunkard,
His fellow; here he stands whole and alive.'
Who said thus, `Thou hast thy fellow slain,
And therefore pray I God both day and night
As woman is, when she has become angry;
Beware of Ire that in thy bosom sleeps;
And chide here the poor innocent,
Says that the workman is worthy of his hire.
Ah, give that convent half a quarter (four bushels) oats!
Farewell, my gold, for it is all gone!"
And by that lord who is called Saint Yve,
When they for souls say the psalm of David:
`Blessed are they who are poor in spirit.'
Are to the high God more acceptable
Beware that -- I say no more, for it suffices.
He fasted long and was in meditation.
The purity and the fasting of us friars
We live in poverty and in abstinence,
And up I rose, and all our convent as well,
Soon after you went out of this town."
Then had I with you enough plain food.
This makes the fiend; this must be amended.
"Now, by your leave, oh dear sir," said she,
But of your great goodness, by your leave,
And her embraces in his arms tightly,
Interpreting scripture is a glorious thing, certainly,
I saw you not this fortnight or more."
Have I upon this bench fared full well;
Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at al."
Bacon or beef, or such thing as you find."
And wrote the names always, as he stood,
And when this friar had said all he intended,
Thanked be God, in prosperity and abundance.
And so befell that on a day this friar
But nonetheless, for fear yet he quaked,
Out of the devil's ass there began to rush
That none of them shall come to this place?'
Friars and fiends are but little different.
The Prologue of the Summoner's Tale
wrongs that you have done against me and mine,
And when the day came that his adversaries should appear in his presence,
Wherefore I pray you, let mercy be in your heart,
And therefore I pray you that in this necessity and in this urgent matter
considered the power that they have given you upon themselves.
And therefore it were better for you to lose so much wealth of your own
Which things arranged, every man returned to his house.
you will consider our great repentance and low submission
Then the wisest of them three answered for them all and said,
to stand surety for them and to be their guarantors.
Which thing was carried out in deed.
and that Melibee should with good heart receive his adversaries to forgiveness and mercy.
For the law says, `There is no thing so good in the natural course of events kind as for a thing
For Seneca says, `There is the remission and forgiveness, where the confession is,'
and are ready to come, what day that it pleases unto your noblesse to limit us or assign us,
by a stronger reason he prohibits and forbids a man to give himself to his enemy.
we nor our friends are not dispossessed nor destroyed through our folly."
and are ready to obey to the speech and commandment of my lord
they were so taken and ravished and had such great joy of her that it was a wonder to tell.
for I put me wholly in your disposition and ordinance."
For, as I have said to you here before this, God has allowed you
And this same Solomon says afterward that
Therefore the prophet says that `troubled eyes have no clear sight.'
and the reconciling begins by thyself.'
Indeed, that would not be to my honor.
and by debate and discord the great riches fall down.'
for as easily is one hurt with one spear as another';
`As easily,' said he, `may our Lord God Almighty give victory to a few folk as to many folk,
And, dear sir, although it be so that for your riches you can have much folk,
that he displeases, and sets at naught his good name or reputation,
`in keeping of thy friend and of thy good name;
providing that you get them with good conscience.
Afterward, in getting of your riches and in using them you must always have three things in your heart
and knows well, or ought know, that when he is dead
when they have no more property of their own, they devote themselves to taking the goods of another man.
in such a manner that men consider you not too niggardly, nor too frugal, nor too foolishly generous
And he that is idle and slow can never find suitable time to earn his profit.
any man make himself rich unto the harm of another person.
For a man that is too desiring to get riches devotes himself
and if be begs, he dies for shame, and yet necessity constrains him to beg.'
just so by poverty come there many harms and evils,
And therefore says Pamphilles: `If a cowherd's daughter,' says he, `is rich,
are all the things of this world governed.
is like to him that takes an hound by the ears.'
By God, you know well that you make no defense
and not by excess nor by outrage.
And although it be so that it was great peril to my enemies
And the same Solomon says, `The angry and wrathful man makes quarrels,
ought much stir you to patience.
the pains and the tribulations that he suffers seem the less unto him;
for he that once has grieved thee, may another time relieve thee and help.'
and to strive with a weaker man, it is folly.'
and at the last make them lose their lordships.
"Certainly," said Prudence, "I grant you that over-much patience is not good.
`Leave the vengeance to me, and I shall do it.'"
she will fail thee and deceive thee.
I consider now and take heed how Fortune has nourished me from my childhood
And as Cassiodorus says, `A man dreads to do outrages when he knows and is aware
that I shall not avenge me on my enemies,
for certainly, the three enemies of mankind
that thou art drunk and hast forgotten Jesus Christ thy creator.
because the Book of Decrees says, `Seldom, or with great effort, are causes brought to a good end
this is to say, the far cause and the near cause.
and thereof follows another vengeance, peril, and war, and other damages without number,
And yet moreover of that word that Cicero calls `consenting,'
And though it so be that your kin are more sure and steadfast than the kin of your adversary,
Let us now consider which are they that you consider so greatly your friends as to your person.
they have done to you all this wrong and all this villainy.
your old enemies reconciled, your flatterers,
and wise advisors said that you ought not suddenly nor hastily proceed in this urgent matter,
And also men make high towers, [and great edifices] with great expenditures and with great travail,
For the book says, `With scorners make no company, but flee their words as venom.'
yet shalt thou always do thy best efforts in guarding of thy person;
that, for any confidence in your strength, that you nor despise not, nor account not the might
For Petrus Alphonsus says, `take no company by the way of a strange man,
without the protection of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But now will I speak to you of the advice which was given to you
but each of them increases and aggravates the other.
that just as they have done me a contrary, right so should I do them another.
And, sir, just as they have answered wisely and discretely,
To this sentence answered immediately dame Prudence, and said,
And since you know well that men shall always find a greater number of fools than of wise men,
to have been advised by these counselors only, and with little consultation,
and folk who do you reverence without love.
be called an advising, but a motion or a moving of folly,
I should govern myself in the choice and in the retention of my advisors.
And Seneca says, `If thy plan is come to the ears of thine enemy, change thy plan.'
of which thou shalt repent, then is it better that thou suffer than begin.
For the proverb says, `He who too much embraces, keeps little.'
And in all these things thou shalt chose the best and abandon all other things .
In the examining then of your advisor you shall consider many things .
advise you one thing privately and counsel you the contrary openly.
they will pervert it into wickedness.'
nor tell them not thy plans.'
The book says, `Thou shalt rather dread and flee from the sweet words of flattering praisers
"Now, since I have told you of which folk you should be advised, now
And then shall you keep this for a general rule: First you shall call to your council
And also he says that `a true friend is a strong defense; whoever finds it,
And therefore men say that the rich man has seldom good advice, unless he have it of himself.
For Seneca says: `If it so be that thou can not hide thine own plans,
then I advise you that you keep it secret.
and certainly, that can never be accomplished,
he can do a thing that he can not do.
and prepare yourself with the aim that he give you advice and comfort, as Tobias taught his son:
And also I will do for you so much that you shall have honor in this undertaking."
`It is not good to be a man alone; let us make for him a helpmate similar to himself.'
yet have men found very many a good woman, and very discrete and wise in giving counsel.
For understand now, you ask advice to do wickedness;
sir, these words are understood of women that are gossips and wicked;
For there is no creature so good that he does not lack
our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was risen from death to life,
with all due respect to you, certainly you despise all women in this manner, and
And moreover, I say that though you have sworn and promised to accomplish
give any power over thyself, for it would be better that thy children
this is to say, if I, for thy advice, would change
immediately he consented to their advice and fully affirmed their opinion.
For Jesus son of Sirach says that "music in weeping is an annoying thing"; this is to say:
who knows very little what war amounts to.
And by these causes we ask time for deliberation, and we shall then, by the grace of God, advise thee
Therefore we ask leisure and opportunity to have deliberation in this case to judge.
are possible to befall for this same cause,
His neighbors full of envy, his feigned friends that seemed reconciled, and his flatterers
"Sir," said he, "as to us surgeons it is our duty that we do to every person the best that we can,
(as it seemed by their appearance) to his love and into his grace;
`Our Lord has given it to me; our Lord hath taken it from me; just as our Lord wished,
And therefore, if you govern yourself by wisdom, put away sorrow out of your heart.
amongst folk in sorrow, but it is rather granted to him to weep.
Your daughter, with the grace of God, shall recover and escape.
that is called the Remedy of Love, where he says
Three of his old foes have seen this, and set ladders to the walls of his house,
